                     the capital order




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                      Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   i          U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                         You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                       Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   ii          U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     THE CAPITAL ORDER
                     How Economists
                     Invented Austerity
                     and Paved the
                     Way to Fascism




                     clara e. mattei




                     The University of Chicago Press
                     Chicago and London




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                      Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   iii        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
                     The University of Chicago Press, Ltd., London
                     © 2022 by The University of Chicago
                     All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or repro-
                     duced in any manner whatsoever without written permission, ex-
                     cept in the case of brief quotations in critical articles and reviews.
                     For more information, contact the University of Chicago Press,
                     1427 E. 60th St., Chicago, IL 60637.
                     Published 2022
                     Printed in the United States of America

                     31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 22            1 2 3 4 5

                     ISBN-13: 978-0-226-81839-9 (cloth)
                     ISBN-13: 978-0-226-81840-5 (e-book)
                     DOI: https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226818405.001.0001

                     Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

                     Names: Mattei, Clara E., author.
                     Title: The capital order : how economists invented austerity and
                        paved the way to fascism / Clara E. Mattei.
                     Description: Chicago : University of Chicago Press, 2022. |
                        Includes bibliographical references and index.
                     Identifiers: LCCN 2022005299 | ISBN 9780226818399 (cloth) |
                        ISBN 9780226818405 (ebook)
                     Subjects: LCSH: Capitalism—Great Britain. | Capitalism—
                        Italy. | Stagnation (Economics) | Fascism—Great Britain. |
                        Fascism—Italy.
                     Classification: LCC HB501 .M38 2022 | DDC 330.12/2—dc23/
                        eng/20220214
                     LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022005299

                       This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992
                     (Permanence of Paper).




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                      Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   iv         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                      To Gianfranco Mattei and
                                                                      revolutionaries everywhere—
                                                                      past, present, future




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                      Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   v          U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   vi        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Contents




                     Introduction . 1

                     part i: war and crisis         . 21

                     1      The Great War and the Economy . 27
                     2      “A Wholly New School of Thought” . 53
                     3      The Struggle for Economic Democracy . 74
                     4      The New Order . 100

                     part ii: the meaning of austerity              . 127

                     5      International Technocrats and the Making of Austerity . 133
                     6      Austerity, a British Story . 161
                     7      Austerity, an Italian Story . 205
                     8      Italian Austerity and Fascism through British Eyes . 246
                     9      Austerity and Its “Successes” . 271
                     10     Austerity Forever . 288

                     Afterword . 307
                     Acknowledgments . 313
                     Notes . 319
                     Bibliography . 409
                     Index . 439




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   vii        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                         You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   viii        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.          6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Introduction




                     In March 2020, during the earliest days of the COVID-19 pandemic,
                     the Democrat governor of New York, Andrew Cuomo, announced
                     plans to slash Medicaid spending to hospitals by $400 million as part
                     of his state budget. It was a shocking announcement: on the threshold
                     of a pandemic, one of the country’s most high-profile politicians was
                     informing the public that he planned to underpay hospitals caring for
                     New York’s poorest and most vulnerable. “We can’t spend what we don’t
                     have,” Cuomo explained with a shrug in a press conference. These cuts
                     were expected to go deeper in the following years, with similar cuts to
                     come for the state’s public schools.
                        In October 2019, following an announced increase in the sub-
                     way fare for citizens of Santiago, Chile, citizens flooded the streets in
                     protest—not only because of transit concerns, but in response to the
                     cumulative public toll of fifty years of privatization, wage repression,
                     cuts in public services, and marginalization of organized labor that had
                     fundamentally hollowed life and society for millions of Chileans. With
                     hundreds of thousands demonstrating in the streets, Chile’s govern-
                     ment responded with dictatorship-style martial law, including a series
                     of deeply unsettling displays of police force that spanned weeks.
                        On July 5, 2015, 61 percent of voters in Greece passed a referendum
                     to oppose a bailout plan from the International Monetary Fund and
                     the European Union that was proposed to address Greece’s sovereign


                                                                                                        1




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   1         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     debt crisis. Eight days later, and in spite of the public referendum, the
                     Greek government signed an agreement anyway, settling on a three-
                     year bailout loan that limited how the country could spend money on
                     its people: Greece had to impose more pension reductions, increase its
                     consumption taxes, privatize services and industries, and implement a
                     pay cut for the country’s public employees. Two years later, the Greek
                     government privatized the country’s ten main ports and put many of
                     its islands up for sale.
                         It is a trope of twentieth- and twenty-first-century life that govern-
                     ments faced with financial shortfalls look first to the services they pro-
                     vide their citizens when making cuts. Instances like these are innumer-
                     able and span every country in the world. When this happens, they
                     produce highly predictable, uniformly devastating effects on societies.
                     Call it the austerity effect: the inevitable public suffering that ensues
                     when nations and states cut public benefits in the name of economic
                     solvency and private industry. While austerity policies may not be iden-
                     tified by name, they underscore the most common tropes of contem-
                     porary politics: budget cuts (especially in welfare expenditures such as
                     public education, health care, housing, and unemployment benefits),
                     regressive taxation, deflation, privatization, wage repression, and em-
                     ployment deregulation. Taken together, this suite of policies entrenches
                     existing wealth and the primacy of the private sector, both of which tend
                     to be held up as economic keys that will guide nations to better days.
                         Americans have seen these policies repeated by governments at
                     every level. Attacks on unions have decimated workers’ collective bar-
                     gaining rights; minimum wages languish at poverty levels; laws allow
                     employers to enforce “non-compete clauses” that bar certain workers
                     from changing jobs in pursuit of better pay; welfare has transformed
                     into “workfare,” i.e., government assistance contingent upon low-wage
                     work. Most tellingly, the country’s regressive tax policies enforce ineq-
                     uitable sharing of public expenses: a larger share of tax revenue drawn
                     from consumption taxes, which are shared across a society, paired
                     with exorbitant tax cuts across top income brackets—91 percent dur-
                     ing Eisenhower’s presidency (1953–1961), 37 percent as of 2021—as well
                     as a reduction in capital gains taxes and corporate taxes. (The Trump


                     2




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   2         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                     administration lowered the latter in 2017 from 35 percent to 21 percent,
                     a remarkable shift from the 50 percent rate of the 1970s.) While wages
                     in the US have been stagnant for decades, now, for the first time in his-
                     tory, the country’s richest 400 families pay a lower overall tax rate than
                     any other income group.
                         Austerity is not new, nor is it a product of the so-called Neoliberal
                     Era that began in the late 1970s. Outside, perhaps, of the less than three
                     booming decades that followed World War II, austerity has been a
                     mainstay of modern capitalism. It has been true throughout history
                     that where capitalism exists, crisis follows. Where austerity has proven
                     wildly effective is in insulating capitalist hierarchies from harm during
                     these moments of would-be social change. Austerity is capitalism’s pro-
                     tector, popular among states for its effectiveness and billed as a means
                     of “fixing” economies by increasing their “efficiency”—short-term re-
                     adjustments for long-term gains.
                         In his famous book Austerity: The History of a Dangerous Idea, the
                     political scientist Mark Blyth shows that although austerity has not
                     “worked” in the sense of achieving its stated goals across history (e.g.,
                     reducing debt or boosting economic growth), it has nonetheless been
                     employed by governments over and over again. Blyth refers to this pat-
                     tern of compulsive repetition as a form of madness. However, if we
                     view austerity in this book’s terms—as a response not just to economic
                     crises (e.g., contraction of output and heightened inflation), but to cri-
                     ses of capitalism—we can begin to see method in the madness: auster-
                     ity is a vital bulwark in defense of the capitalist system.
                         When I refer to a crisis of capitalism, I do not mean an economic
                     crisis—say, a slowdown in growth or an uptick in inflation. Capital-
                     ism is in crisis when its core relationship (the sale of production for
                     profit) and its two enabling pillars (private property in the means of
                     production and wage relations between owners and workers) are con-
                     tested by the public, in particular by the workers who make capital-
                     ism run. As part of these expressions of unhappiness, people have his-
                     torically demanded alternative forms of social organization. Indeed,
                     and as this book will demonstrate, austerity’s primary utility over
                     the last century has been to silence such calls and to foreclose alter-


                                                                                                        3




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   3         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     natives to capitalism. Mostly austerity serves to quash public outcry
                     and worker strikes—not, as it is often advertised, to spontaneously im-
                     prove a country’s economic indicators by practicing greater economic
                     discipline.
                         Austerity as we know it today emerged after World War I as a
                     method for preventing capitalism’s collapse: economists in political po-
                     sitions used policy levers to make all classes of society more invested
                     in private, capitalist production, even when these changes amounted
                     to profound (if also involuntary) personal sacrifices. In the early 1920s,
                     austerity functioned as a powerful counteroffensive to strikes and other
                     forms of social unrest that exploded on an unprecedented scale after
                     the war—a period traditionally, and oddly, overlooked by political and
                     economic scholars who study austerity. The timing of austerity’s inven-
                     tion reflects its animating motivations. Of greater importance than aus-
                     terity’s purported economic efficacy was its ability to guard capitalist
                     relations of production during a time of unprecedented social organiz-
                     ing and public agitation from working classes.
                         Austerity has been so widespread in its uptake over the last century
                     that it has become largely undetectable: the economics of austerity, with
                     its prescribed budgetary cuts and public moderation, is largely synony-
                     mous with today’s economics. This makes a critical history of auster-
                     ity, especially one rendered in class terms, profoundly challenging. But
                     to the extent that we stop perceiving austerity as a sincere toolbox for
                     managing an economy, and when we consider its history through the
                     lens of class, it becomes clear that austerity preserves something foun-
                     dational to our capitalist society. For capitalism to work in delivering
                     economic growth, the social relation of capital—people selling their
                     labor power for a wage—must be uniform across a society. In other
                     words, economic growth presupposes a certain sociopolitical order, or
                     capital order. Austerity, viewed as a set of fiscal, monetary, and indus-
                     trial guardrails on an economy, ensures the sanctity of these social rela-
                     tions. The structural limitations it imposes on spending and wages en-
                     sure that, for the vast majority of those living in a society, “work hard,
                     save hard” is more than just an expression of toughness; it’s the only
                     path to survival.


                     4




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   4         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                        This book examines the history of how this system came to high
                     fashion in the twentieth century, including its most powerful expres-
                     sion in the postwar economies of Britain and Italy. In both cases, aus-
                     terity was a means for economists in power to reimpose capital order
                     where it had been lost.
                        The story begins with the events of the Great War that triggered the
                     most severe crisis of capitalism to date—the unprecedented wartime
                     mobilizations within European countries that shattered capitalism’s
                     shield of inevitability. For most people living in these countries during
                     and after the war, whether they feared or hoped for it, the abolition
                     of capitalism loomed as the imminent outcome of the war’s devasta-
                     tions and its showcasing of state economic planning. In the words of
                     Willi Gallacher, the British shop steward leader, “the order of industry,
                     which previous to the war seemed destined to last forever, is now tot-
                     tering in every country of the world.” In Italy, the threat was likewise
                     palpable to the famed liberal economist Luigi Einaudi: “it seemed that
                     a shoulder shove would suffice to knock the so-called capitalist regime
                     to the ground . . . the reign of equality seemed close to ensue.” The
                     words of the bourgeois professor were juxtaposed with the enthusiasm
                     of Palmiro Togliatti, a leading member of the Ordine Nuovo (“new or-
                     der”) labor movement: “men recoil from the old order of things, they
                     feel the need to place themselves in a new manner, to shape their com-
                     munity in a new form, of forging new living relations that allow for a
                     construction of a wholly renewed social edifice.”
                        These new voices from the intellectual Left accelerated change in
                     social relations. L’Ordine nuovo, based in the industrial Italian city of
                     Turin and led by Togliatti and his comrade Antonio Gramsci, is crucial
                     to this story because it embodies the most explicit antagonist to capi-
                     talist practice and its intellectual justifications. It represented a break
                     from both hierarchical relations of society and top-down knowledge
                     production.
                        The collective anti-capitalist awakening was facilitated by the ex-
                     traordinary governmental measures during the war to temporar-
                     ily interrupt capital accumulation by the owners of private industry.
                     In order to confront the enormities of the war production effort, the


                                                                                                        5




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   5         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     governments of all warring nations were forced to intervene in what
                     had been, until then, the untarnished realm of the market. As govern-
                     ments collectivized key industries—munitions, mines, shipping, and
                     railways—they also employed workers and regulated the cost and sup-
                     ply of labor. State interventionism not only allowed the Allies to win
                     the war; it also made clear that wage relations and the privatization
                     of production—far from being “natural”—were political choices of a
                     class-minded society.
                         After the war, emboldened by the new economic precedents of the
                     mobilization effort, workers in Europe spoke with a stronger and more
                     radical voice, and they expressed themselves in ways beyond the bal-
                     lot box. They consolidated collective power through unions, parties,
                     guilds, and rank-and-file institutions to control production. The extent
                     of politicization among large chunks of the population meant that their
                     public opinion on economic questions could no longer be ignored.
                     As the famed British economist John Maynard Keynes well observed,
                     “even if economists and technicians knew the secret remedy, they could
                     not apply it until they had persuaded the politicians; and the politi-
                     cians, who have ears but no eyes, will not attend to the persuasion until
                     it reverberates back to them as an echo from the great public.”
                         In a moment of unparalleled democratic upheaval all over Eu-
                     rope, in the midst of mounting monetary inflation and revolutionary
                     winds coming from Russia, Bavaria, and Hungary, economic experts
                     had to wield their greatest weapons in order to preserve the world as
                     they thought it should exist. Austerity was their most useful tool: it
                     functioned—and still functions—to preserve the indisputability of
                     capitalism.
                         The austerity counteroffensive successfully disempowered the ma-
                     jority. Austere governments and their experts implemented policies
                     that either directly (through repressive pay and employment policies)
                     or indirectly (through restrictive monetary and fiscal policies that de-
                     pressed economic activity and raised unemployment) subjugated the
                     majority to capital—a social relation in which a majority sells their ca-
                     pacity to work in exchange for a wage. Austerity shifted resources from
                     the working majority to the saver/investor minority, and in so doing


                     6




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   6         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                     enforced a public acceptance of repressive conditions in economic pro-
                     duction. This acceptance was further entrenched by experts whose eco-
                     nomic theories depicted capitalism as the only and best possible world.
                        These events of the early 1920s, including the widespread bourgeois
                     fear of the crumbling of capitalism, were a watershed moment. The an-
                     tagonism of the political and economic establishment to the will of the
                     public, and especially their interventions to quell such revolutionary
                     sentiments, reestablished capital order in Europe and ensured the tra-
                     jectory of the political economy for the rest of the century, a trajectory
                     that has continued to this day.

                     Austerity, Then and Now

                     Part of what makes austerity so effective as a set of policies is that it
                     packages itself in the language of honest, hardscrabble economics.
                     Vague sentiments such as “hard work” and “thrift” are hardly novel;
                     they have been extolled by economists since the days of Adam Smith,
                     David Ricardo, and Thomas Robert Malthus, and their latter-day fol-
                     lowers who cultivated these maxims as the stuff of personal virtue and
                     good policy. These sensibilities were also reflected in 1821 with the in-
                     stitution of the gold standard, a policy whereby upstanding govern-
                     ments demonstrated their fiscal and monetary rigor by linking their
                     currencies to their holdings of precious metals, both domestically and
                     in colonies. A closer history of austerity shows, however, that it was
                     in its modern form something quite different from these earlier, moral
                     exercises. Austerity as a twentieth-century phenomenon materialized
                     as a state-led, technocratic project in a moment of unprecedented po-
                     litical enfranchisement of citizens (who had gained the right to vote
                     for the first time) and mounting demands for economic democracy. In
                     this way, austerity must be understood for what it is and remains: an
                     anti-democratic reaction to threats of bottom-up social change. As this
                     book will show, its modern form cannot be divorced from the historical
                     context in which it was born.
                         In post–World War I Britain and in other liberal democracies where
                     widespread political empowerment was historically extolled, the state


                                                                                                        7




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   7         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     effectively wielded austerity as a political weapon against its own peo-
                     ple. The British workers had fueled the nation’s war effort, and in the
                     course of the wartime mobilization became aware that socioeconomic
                     relations were no natural givens and could be different. By imposing
                     austerity measures after the war, the British government effectively told
                     its working classes to return to the back of the line.
                         The public disgust for early austerity was its crucible: austerity was
                     rendered more antagonistic because it had to overcome—and indeed
                     tame—an incensed public. After World War I, with the gold standard
                     in pieces, the newly enfranchised European “great public” was not sim-
                     ply going to accept austere policies, and the experts knew it. Thus, they
                     devised austerity to conjoin two strategies: consensus and coercion.
                         Consensus implied a conscious effort to “awaken” the public to the
                     truth and necessity of reforms that favored economic stabilization,
                     even when it might hurt. Recognizing that a restless public would be
                     unlikely to make the “correct” decision regarding this greater good,
                     experts complemented consensus with coercion. This took two forms.
                     First, austerity had within it the principle of excluding the general pub-
                     lic from economic decision-making and instead delegating such deci-
                     sions to technocratic institutions—especially the central banks, whose
                     setting of interest rates served as a hinge for public wages and unem-
                     ployment. This preemption of decision-making by the expert class cre-
                     ated a canvas for further policy decisions that propelled the installation
                     of austerity. Second, coercion lay not only in who made economic deci-
                     sions, but also in the outcome of those decisions—that is, in the very
                     workings of austerity.
                         European governments and their central banks enforced the
                     “proper” (i.e., class-appropriate) behavior on the working classes in or-
                     der to rescue capital accumulation by the wealthy. The three forms of
                     austerity policies—fiscal, monetary, and industrial—worked in unison
                     to exert a downward pressure on wages among the rest of society. Their
                     aim was to shift national wealth and resources toward the upper classes,
                     who, the economic experts insisted, were the ones capable of saving
                     and investing. Fiscal austerity comes in the form of regressive taxation
                     and cuts to “unproductive” public expenditures, especially on social


                     8




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   8         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                     endeavors (health, education, etc.). While regressive taxation imposes
                     thrift on the majority and exempts the saver-investor minority, bud-
                     get cuts indirectly do the same: public resources are diverted from the
                     many to the saver-investor few, in that budget cuts come with the stated
                     priority of paying back the debt that rests in the hands of national or in-
                     ternational creditors. Similarly, monetary austerity, meaning monetary
                     revaluation policies (such as an increase in interest rates and reduction
                     in money supply) directly protect creditors and increase the value of
                     their savings. Meanwhile organized labor has its hands tied, since hav-
                     ing less money in circulation depresses the economy and diminishes
                     the bargaining power of the working class. Finally, industrial auster-
                     ity, which takes the form of authoritarian industrial policies (layoffs
                     of public employees, wage reductions, union- and strike-busting, etc.),
                     further protects vertical wage relations between owners and workers,
                     fostering wage repression in favor of the higher profit of the few. This
                     book will study these three forms of austerity—what I call the austerity
                     trinity—and how they at once require and advance one another. This
                     historical inquiry, examining a moment in which capitalism was very
                     much on the ropes, enlightens many vital connections that economists
                     overlook when discussing austerity today.
                         First, austerity policies cannot be reduced to mere fiscal or mon-
                     etary policies from central government institutions. Industrial poli-
                     cies, public and private, that create favorable conditions for profit and
                     discipline workers are central to austerity as well. Indeed, as the book
                     will show, our experts’ fixation on debt repayment, balanced budgets,
                     foreign exchanges, and inflation reveals a more fundamental purpose:
                     taming class conflict, which is essential for the continued reproduction
                     of capitalism.
                         Second, this inquiry clarifies that austerity is more than just eco-
                     nomic policy; it is an amalgamation of policy and theory. Austerity’s
                     policies thrive because they sit atop a set of economic theories that
                     inform and justify them. This book examines the threading of a cer-
                     tain kind of theory within policy making, including how the resulting
                     technocracy—government controlled by technical experts—is central
                     to protecting modern capitalism from its threats. There are no better


                                                                                                        9




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   9         U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     candidates to illustrate this entanglement than the characters in the
                     post–World War I story, who were among the most influential techno-
                     crats of the 1920s.

                     Technocracy and “Apolitical” Theory, Then and Now

                     Technocracy dominates governmental policy making on multiple
                     fronts. One is the historical convention of economists advising people
                     who govern. The other is epistemic, a form whereby these economists
                     frame economics—including the economic arguments they themselves
                     posited—as having achieved a standpoint above class interests or par-
                     tisanship. Economics, economists argue, constitutes value-free truths
                     about capitalism—natural facts of this world rather than constructed
                     (or at least political) positions.
                        The technocracy that facilitated austerity’s rise in the twentieth cen-
                     tury can be attributed to the British economist Ralph G. Hawtrey, who
                     authored the texts and memoranda that would serve as the guidelines
                     for British austerity after World War I. As is the nature of technocracy,
                     Hawtrey had help. Working at his side were the charismatic Sir Basil
                     Blackett and Sir Otto Niemeyer, both powerful senior Treasury officials
                     who closely advised the chancellor of the exchequer, Britain’s minister
                     in charge of economic and financial policies.
                        In Rome, the school of academic Italian economics that led the
                     country’s austerity policies was presided over by Maffeo Pantaleoni,
                     who directed a group of economists under the Italian Fascist govern-
                     ment that was codified in 1922 under “The Duce,” Benito Mussolini.
                     The prime minister granted Pantaleoni’s pupil Alberto De Stefani ex-
                     ceptional powers to apply austerity in De Stefani’s role as minister of
                     finance. The Italian economists took advantage of this rare opportu-
                     nity to explore the reaches of what they considered “pure economics,”
                     a school of economics-as-natural-law that aligned with austerity. They
                     enjoyed an unprecedented advantage in governance in that they could
                     directly implement economic models without the encumbrance of
                     democratic procedures—and sometimes, thanks to Mussolini, with the
                     help of tools of political oppression.


                     10




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   10        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                        This book delves into the writings and public comments of these
                     two sets of economic experts, men who designed austerity policies and
                     wrangled consensus for their brute-force implementations. While their
                     voices were central to the formulation of austerity after World War I,
                     their role in this insidious counterrevolution has not been studied or
                     explicated elsewhere. What their stories make clear, and what remains
                     true today, is that in order to persist, austerity requires experts willing
                     to speak to its virtues. That relationship remains true today, albeit with
                     an ever-refreshed cast of technocratic figures.
                        After World War I, economists in Britain and Italy—both capitalist
                     nations, but dramatically different otherwise—enjoyed unprecedented
                     roles in shaping and implementing public policy to guide their nations’
                     postwar reformations. In both cases, economists leaned heavily on
                     the principles of what they thought of as “pure economics”—then an
                     emerging paradigm, but one still foundational to today’s mainstream
                     economics, or what we sometimes refer to as the neoclassical tradition.
                        The “pure economics” paradigm successfully established the field
                     as the politically “neutral” science of policies and individual behavior.
                     By dissociating the economic process from the political one—i.e., by
                     presenting economic theory and conceptualizing markets as free from
                     social relations of domination—pure economics restored an illusion of
                     consent within capitalist systems, allowing these relations of domina-
                     tion to masquerade instead as economic rationality. Indeed, techno-
                     cracy’s strength rested in this power to frame austerity’s most funda-
                     mental objectives—reinstating capitalist relations of production, and
                     subjugating the working class into accepting the inviolability of private
                     property and wage relations—as a return to an economy’s natural state.
                        These economists’ “apolitical” theory was centered on an idealized
                     caricature of an economic being: the rational saver. This broad-stroke
                     characterization had a dual result: first, it created the illusion that any-
                     one could be a rational saver, provided they worked hard enough and
                     no matter their material conditions and endowments; and second, it
                     discredited and devalued workers, who went from being understood as
                     productive members of society to being seen as social liabilities based on
                     their inability to practice virtuous economic behaviors. (Note: it was, and


                                                                                                       11




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   11        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     remains, exceedingly challenging for people to save money they don’t
                     have.) Accordingly, workers after the war lost all the agency that the theo-
                     ries and actions of the Ordinovista movement had won for them. Because
                     through the economists’ lens, the productive class in a society was not the
                     working class, but the capitalist class—the people who could save, invest,
                     and thus contribute to the private accumulation of capital. Economic
                     theory was no longer a tool for critical thought and action; it was a mold
                     for imposing passive consent and maintaining a top-down status quo.
                         Austerity’s capacity to divert attention from systemic problems
                     also helped foster collective passivity. Economists attributed postwar
                     economic crises to the excesses of citizens, who were thereby delegiti-
                     mized in their socioeconomic needs and expected to redeem them-
                     selves through economic sacrifices, restraint, hard work, and wage
                     curtailment—all essential preconditions for capital accumulation and
                     international economic competitiveness.
                         Austerity policies in the spirit of “pure economics” were a disaster
                     for most people living in Britain and Italy in the 1920s. Thus, the book
                     delves into the paradox of a doctrine that presents itself as apolitical
                     but has as its central purpose the “taming of men,” as the Italian aca-
                     demic and economist Umberto Ricci crudely put it in 1908. Under a ve-
                     neer of apolitical science, technocrat economists were undertaking the
                     most political action of all—bending the working classes to the wills
                     and needs of the capital-owning classes for the enrichment of a small
                     minority.
                         The story of austerity is also an origin story for the rapid ascent and
                     awesome political power of modern economics. It is true today, but
                     was not after World War I, that capitalism is the only show in town:
                     mainstream economic theory flourishes because our societies rely al-
                     most entirely on the coercion of people who have no alternative but
                     to sell their labor power to the propertied few in order to survive. (As
                     the economist Branko Milanović notes in his 2019 book Capitalism,
                     Alone, “the fact that the entire globe now operates according to the
                     same economic principles is without historical precedent.”) Rather
                     than acknowledging and studying the odd homogeneity of this real-
                     ity, mainstream economics works to conceal it. Class conflict and eco-


                     12




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   12        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                     nomic domination are supplanted by a supposed harmony between in-
                     dividuals in which those at the top are seen as those who exhibit greater
                     economic virtue and whose quest for profit is beneficial to all. In this
                     way economic theory thwarts critiques of vertical relations of produc-
                     tion, justifies capitalism, and counsels public compliance.
                         Capitalism’s ubiquity today can make criticizing or even observing
                     capitalism seem quaint. After all, we have internalized its teachings to
                     the point that our values and beliefs are largely aligned with those that
                     are functional to capital accumulation. It is all so embedded that today
                     a majority of American workers can live paycheck to paycheck with
                     little to no social insurance and still largely accept that their position
                     is one they deserve; the country’s wealthy, meanwhile, benefit from
                     a seeming national allergy to any form of even mild tax reform that
                     would shift more tax burden to the wealthy. The current landscape is
                     quite different from the one technocrats were confronting in 1919, but
                     the two are most certainly connected.
                         Indeed, even an economic expert like Keynes, usually understood as
                     the most vocal critic of austerity, in 1919 was of a very different opin-
                     ion. He shared with colleagues at the British Treasury a sense of terror
                     around the threatened breakdown of the capital order—and surpris-
                     ingly enough, he also shared their austere solution to the capitalist cri-
                     sis. As the 1920s progressed, Keynes’s economic theory of how best to
                     avoid crises did change; what did not change was his fundamental con-
                     cern to preserve capital order—what he described as the “thin and pre-
                     carious crust of civilization”  that required protection. This existential
                     anxiety remains a cardinal feature of Keynesianism to this day. Even
                     though Keynes is not a central figure in this story, his intellectual bond
                     with several of austerity’s principals remains essential to fully under-
                     standing the nature and impetus of the so-called Keynesian Revolution
                     later in the twentieth century.

                     Liberalism and Fascism, Then and Now

                     The story of austerity’s counteroffensive against the upstart lower class
                     began at two international financial conferences, first in Brussels in


                                                                                                       13




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   13        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     1919 and then in Genoa in 1922. These two conferences constituted
                     landmark events in the rise of the first global technocratic agenda of
                     austerity. Their agendas found swift, direct application throughout Eu-
                     rope, most notably in Britain and Italy—two socioeconomic settings
                     that were poles apart. At one end, Britain, a solid parliamentary de-
                     mocracy led by well-established institutions and orthodox Victorian
                     values, was an empire whose centuries-long world economic-financial
                     hegemony was now being contested by an ascendant United States. At
                     the other end was Italy, an economically backward country that was
                     reeling from fresh revolutionary surges and civil war. Italy lacked self-
                     sufficiency and was highly dependent on foreign imports and capital.
                     By October 1922 Mussolini’s Fascism had seized Italy’s reins.
                         This book narrates the parallel and intertwined stories of austerity’s
                     triumphs in Britain and Italy after World War I. I choose to focus on
                     these nations because the disparities of their political-institutional re-
                     alities facilitate identification of the fundamental elements of austerity
                     and the capitalist mode of production across places and through time.
                     Britain, the cradle of classical liberalism, and Italy, the birthplace of fas-
                     cism, are unquestioningly understood to represent opposite ideological
                     worlds. However, once austerity becomes our historical focus, the lines
                     of division start to blur. Austerity transcends all ideological and insti-
                     tutional differences, barreling toward a similar goal within dissimilar
                     countries: the necessity to rehabilitate capital accumulation in settings
                     where capitalism has lost its innocence and been revealed in its classist
                     tendencies.
                         This story also reveals how British liberalism and Italian Fascism
                     fostered similar environments for austerity to thrive. These similari-
                     ties went beyond the shared sacrifices of British and Italian citizens, or
                     the fact that both countries’ agendas of austerity were rationalized by
                     similar economic theories. It is also evident that the original formation
                     of Italy’s Fascist dictatorship required the support of the Italian liberal
                     elite as well as the support of the Anglo-American financial establish-
                     ment, both of which Mussolini was able to secure by implementing—
                     often with force—austerity policies. Tellingly, the years 1925 to 1928
                     correspond to the peak of both the Fascist regime’s consolidation and


                     14




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   14        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                     of American and British financial investments in Italian government
                     bonds. Fascist Italy’s austerity economy provided these liberal countries
                     with a profitable place to park their capital, much to their expressed
                     satisfaction.
                        When it came to dealing with Mussolini and Fascist Italy, the lib-
                     eral axis of Britain and the United States constructed a practical dis-
                     sonance: they looked past the country’s unsavory politics, which after
                     1922 were grounded in state-sponsored political violence, while taking
                     advantage of the opportunities in Italy’s stabilized economy. To the lib-
                     eral financial establishment, a country with revolutionary fervor like
                     Italy’s required a strong state to reinstate order; that Italy veered all the
                     way to an authoritarian state would just accelerate the subjugation of a
                     radicalized working class to austerity. As this story demonstrates, both
                     Fascist and liberal economists agreed on this point.
                        While the Italian economists’ anti-democratic views were more
                     explicit—Pantaleoni called democracy “the management of the state
                     and its functions by the most ignorant, the most incapable” (Panta-
                     leoni 1922, 269)—the British technocrats also recognized that, even in
                     Britain, economic institutions required exemption from democratic
                     control in order to proceed optimally. Indeed, the Brussels and Genoa
                     conferences formalized central bank independence as a crucial step to
                     this end. The famed British economist Ralph Hawtrey described the
                     advantage of situating a central bank free from “criticism and pressure,”
                     noting that the bank could follow the precept “Never explain; never
                     regret; never apologise” (Hawtrey 1925a, 243).
                        Throughout these pages an interesting theme will come to the fore:
                     economic experts, whether Fascist or liberal, recognized that in order
                     to secure economic freedom—i.e., the market freedom of the “virtu-
                     ous” saver/entrepreneur—countries had to forgo, or at minimum mar-
                     ginalize, political freedoms. This was apparent especially in Italy dur-
                     ing the country’s “red years” of 1919 to 1920, when the majority of the
                     country’s workers demonstrated their unwillingness to accept a notion
                     of economic freedom that presupposed their subordination to hierar-
                     chical relations of production. These workers fought for the liberation
                     of the majority and espoused an understanding of economic freedom


                                                                                                       15




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   15        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     that was antithetical to that of experts, one that presupposed the over-
                     throw of private property and wage labor in favor of shared means and
                     democratic control of production. The fate of capitalism, for our econ-
                     omists, hung in the balance. A sweeping counteroffensive—one that
                     transcended party lines—was underway.
                         The Italian case exposes a repressive drive that was only latent in the
                     British case and persists today in countries across the world. While in
                     Italy industrial austerity directly subordinated labor through the ban-
                     ning of strikes and unions (except Fascist unions—a contradiction in
                     terms, seemingly), Britain’s monetary austerity caused an economic
                     downturn that indirectly achieved the same ends: unprecedented un-
                     employment (up to 17 percent of the insured laborers in 1921), which
                     weakened workers’ bargaining power and lowered wages, and an ensu-
                     ing reduction in government revenues that tied the state’s hands and
                     precluded any public response to workers’ needs or demands.
                         That the British experts were willing to tolerate such high unem-
                     ployment, ostensibly in the service of controlling inflation, is part of
                     the “madness” to which Blyth refers. However, this madness makes
                     sense if we recognize that high unemployment functions to suppress
                     the threat that workers’ demands posed to capitalism. What the British
                     economist A. C. Pigou called the “inescapable fact” of unemployment
                     is that it not only killed the political enthusiasm of the working classes,
                     but also forced workers to accept lower pay—in the postwar case of
                     Britain, a 41 percent nominal wage drop from 1920 to 1923 that allowed
                     for the profit rate to recover swiftly from its immediate postwar trou-
                     bles. In this way, it is clear that the primary advantage of the economic
                     downturn was the unequivocal restoration of the capitalist class struc-
                     ture. Rather than exercising direct political and economic coercion, as
                     Italy did, Britain relied on seemingly apolitical technocrats at the heads
                     of its Treasury and the Bank of England, who achieved similar ends
                     through monetary deflation and budget cuts; the structural violence
                     of macroeconomic policy could do the same as the physical violence
                     of Fascist militias. These dire social consequences were evident to po-
                     litical observers. In 1923, Labour MP Dr. Alfred Salter’s words echoed
                     through the British Parliament: “Unfortunately the question of wages


                     16




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   16        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                     has returned to the position of ten years ago with a vengeance. . . .
                     You have even got the extraordinary spectacle of able-bodied men in
                     full employment . . . receiving wages at such a low level that they are
                     obliged to have recourse to the Poor Law. . . . It is a most astounding
                     state of things.”
                        The close connection between austerity and technocracy, and the
                     success of early efforts to build consensus around its coercive policies,
                     remain a vivid reality today. Despite repeated economic crises, econ-
                     omists are still relied upon to devise the solution when a new crisis
                     emerges, and their solutions continue to require that workers absorb
                     the lion’s share of hardship through lower wages, longer workdays, and
                     welfare cuts.

                     Wage Repression, Then and Now

                     Some economists have referred to austerity as a simple “policy mis-
                     take,” a technical miscalibration that produced suppression of do-
                     mestic demand and tightening of labor markets. This view dramati-
                     cally underestimates the impacts of austerity, the success and legacy of
                     which remain indelible to this day. After all, the combination of fiscal,
                     monetary, and industrial policies in the austerity playbook have dealt
                     a lasting blow to the working classes and their expectations for a dif-
                     ferent socioeconomic system. The rehabilitation of hierarchical wage
                     relations—in which the majority of people cannot make their living in
                     any other way than by selling their labor power as a commodity on the
                     market, and by doing so, renounce their right to have a say in how this
                     commodity is consumed by the employer who purchases it—is perhaps
                     austerity’s defining characteristic. In doing so, and as chapter 9 details,
                     it also produces an increase in the rate of exploitation for workers and
                     a surge in profits for owners.
                         In political economy, the concept of capitalist exploitation refers to
                     the dynamic in which an employee exerts a greater amount of labor
                     than she receives in compensation. In other words, the capitalist class
                     appropriates a surplus value (its profits), as well as other forms of sur-
                     plus value, such as rents and interest (see Foley 1986). The rate of exploi-


                                                                                                       17




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   17        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     tation can be measured by comparing the amount of national income
                     that goes to profits (profit share) as compared to wages (wage share);
                     another way is to compare labor productivity to wages paid. In both
                     measures, Italy and Britain saw increasing exploitation across the 1920s.
                     Mapping this against political events, the conclusions about austerity’s
                     effects on workers become clear: exploitation plummeted during the
                     “red years” of 1918–1920, as nominal daily wages of workers quadrupled
                     (Britain) or even quintupled (Italy) compared to the prewar years. This
                     trend changed immediately with the introduction of austerity.
                        A century later, exploitation due to wage stagnation—what I show
                     to be the most intractable legacy of austerity—persists as the main
                     driver of a global inequality trend in which a country like Italy (which
                     suffers far less inequality than the United States) has seen the wealth
                     of its richest 6 million increased by 72 percent in the last ten years.
                     The country’s poorest 6 million have had their wealth diminished by
                     63 percent over the same period. The official data tells that in 2018,
                     5 million people (8.3 percent of the Italian population) lived in absolute
                     poverty, i.e., were deprived of the necessary means to live with dig-
                     nity. The numbers in 2020 worsened: 5.6 million people, 9.4 percent
                     of the population, live in absolute poverty. In Britain the situation is
                     no less gloomy: 30 percent of the country’s children (4.1 million) lived
                     in relative poverty in 2017–2018, and 70 percent of these children lived
                     in working families. As of 2020, the number of poor children has in-
                     creased to 4.3 million.
                        In a 2020 macroeconomic analysis of the US economy, the econo-
                     mists Lance Taylor and Özlem Ömer showed that in the preceding forty
                     years, the profit share of the nation’s output rose substantially, while the
                     labor share of that same output correspondingly went down. The rela-
                     tionship between owner profit and worker loss was symmetrical; one
                     was taking from the other. An increase in exploitation was also evident,
                     with real wages grossly lagging behind labor productivity. Once the
                     reader is acquainted with the story in this book, the inner workings of
                     such dynamics will become familiar, and hopefully clear.
                        Today, as in the 1920s, the winners under austerity remain an afflu-
                     ent minority: the richest 1 percent of the population subsists primar-


                     18




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   18        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                         introduction


                     ily on profit-related incomes tied to existing wealth (e.g., dividends,
                     interest). The rest of the population—those who rely on income from
                     labor alone, or the bottom 60 percent who rely on a combination of
                     low wages and social benefits—has lost (Taylor and Ömer 2020). It is
                     a defeat so thorough and so striking that the median American male
                     worker in 2019 actually earned less in real terms than what he did in
                     1973. Since that year, structural inequality has robbed American work-
                     ers of $2.5 trillion each year, money that flowed directly into the hands
                     of the few.
                        Warren Buffet, the renowned investor and as of 2020 the fourth rich-
                     est person on earth, was quoted in 2006 as observing: “There’s class
                     warfare, all right, but it’s my class, the rich class, that’s making war, and
                     we’re winning.” This book shows how the biggest victory of all, and the
                     one that paved the way for all the winning that followed, was the fight
                     that took place a century ago.

                     Methods and Sources

                     Tracing the origin story of austerity began in 2013 at the archives of the
                     Library of the Bank of Italy and the Bank’s De Stefani Archive, both
                     located in Rome. Here I spent years studying the works of the Italian
                     economists who would become central to my story.
                        The main challenge in piecing together this history was to avoid the
                     compartmentalization of its characters’ different lives—their personal,
                     academic, and political trajectories—and to integrate and study the
                     connections between the economists’ theoretical writings, political in-
                     terventions, and public commentaries. As I did so, a coherent austerity
                     agenda—an agenda that was at once theory and practice—came into
                     stark relief. Much of the archival material that informed this process
                     finds its first translation in the pages of this book.
                        The same approach guided my research in the British National Ar-
                     chives, the archives of the Bank of England, and the Churchill Archives
                     Center: uncovering and contextualizing the worldviews of the experts
                     at the British Treasury who drove Britain’s austerity movement. The
                     study of Ralph Hawtrey’s theory was long and hard: the man was pro-


                                                                                                       19




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   19        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     introduction


                     lific both in his academic publications and in the memoranda he wrote
                     for his colleagues at the Treasury. His thoughts were often opaque.
                     However, as I put the pieces of the puzzle together, a holistic picture
                     of austerity emerged. As this book will detail, it was a design heeded
                     and realized by the work of his senior colleagues, Sir Basil Blackett and
                     Sir Otto Niemeyer. Unearthing the activities of these men from dusty
                     Treasury files, I was riveted by the evidence of Hawtrey’s persuasion
                     of the other two, and in turn how the two bureaucrats, neither one a
                     trained economist, came to be missionaries in campaigns to export the
                     British austerity agenda to other countries around the globe.
                         To understand and to develop a chronology of the class conflicts in
                     Britain and Italy during and after the war, I immersed myself in the
                     journalism of the period—left, right, and center; working class and
                     bourgeois. This included the leftist Italian newspapers L’Avanti and
                     L’Ordine nuovo, quoted often in this book, together with their British
                     equivalents, The Daily Herald and the labor pamphlets of the metal-
                     lurgical shop stewards. Government archives were a crucial resource
                     for reconstructing the voices of the British workers. Various bourgeois
                     newspapers of the era (the London Times, the Economist, La stampa,
                     Il corriere della sera) as well as transcripts of parliamentary debates
                     provided a useful contrasting voice. I complemented this historical
                     investigation with the dispatches from the British Embassy in Rome,
                     housed within the Foreign Office files of the National Archives; these
                     are among the most telling voices in the book.
                         A discomfort in telling a new history is the potential that it will be
                     dismissed as a selective or even partisan telling. For this reason, and
                     because I am an economist and cannot help myself, I have included a
                     chapter at the end of the book that offers quantitative analysis to sup-
                     port the story I have otherwise told in archival and theoretical terms.
                     For this penultimate chapter, chapter 9, I collected macroeconomic and
                     financial data from the most up-to-date statistical sources to illustrate
                     the economic changes in Britain and Italy that support my argument
                     that austerity was, and remains, a tool of class control. If the history of
                     the first eight chapters doesn’t persuade readers, perhaps the economics
                     of the final section will.


                     20




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   20        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Part I
                     WAR AND CRISIS




                     The scale of the First World War reshaped Europe’s capitalist econo-
                     mies. Many private industries became public ones, and governments
                     suddenly functioned as both buyers and sellers in economies that were
                     designed to meet basic needs at home and drive the war effort abroad.
                     Whatever the old social order was, it appeared to be changing.
                         The change didn’t last. With the end of the war, these same capitalist
                     nations moved swiftly to revert their economies to their earlier states:
                     top-down, capitalist, private. Wartime sentiments of egalitarianism
                     were smothered; the power of organized labor was diluted. Capitalism
                     was back.
                         Capitalism was more than a system of economy; it was a system of
                     social order, too. If the war served as a brief, uncomfortable dalliance
                     with the basic tenets of socialism—including a planned central econ-
                     omy and strong organized labor—then the postwar attempt to reverse
                     all of that was a testament to the power and influence of capital over
                     modern nations.
                         Capital is not, as its more recent usage suggests, mere wealth. In-
                     deed, the accumulation of capital depends on two fundamental pillars:
                     first, small groups or individuals own the means of production; second,
                     they use those means for the accumulation of wealth through the hir-
                     ing of wage workers. Wage relations are the primary social relationship
                     in any capitalist system, and they can be observed wherever a worker


                                                                                                       21




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   21        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     sells her capacity to work to her employer in return for a wage—a rela-
                     tion that is called capital. Through this sale, the worker surrenders her
                     agency over how her labor is used and what its products will be. For
                     example, a person who works as a bank teller performs a set of required
                     tasks, and for that she is paid a wage—not a share of the revenue she
                     produces, which by design is greater than her wage. This condition is
                     part of all types of wage-jobs in our society, from the least paid to the
                     best paid. Most people regard it as a sort of natural order for modern
                     societies.
                        This was not always the case. The capitalist system was subject to
                     extensive political experimentation and legal formalization during the
                     seventeenth century. By the mid-eighteenth century, capitalism had
                     been refined to the point that its institutions could be considered natu-
                     ralized. Private property and wage relations were no longer understood
                     as historical institutions that evolved at the expense of other systems;
                     they were the natural order of people and things. As part of this newly
                     entrenched system, politics was understood as separate from the econ-
                     omy. Politics could evolve; the economy was self-governing, as God
                     intended.
                        In this view, an economy is “objective” because it is disciplined by
                     the laws of markets, including the laws of supply and demand. In this
                     objective realm, economic coercion is concealed because it acquires
                     such an impersonal form: the majority of us are forced to sell ourselves
                     on the labor market in order to survive in a society where, without
                     money, we cannot obtain food or housing. In a capitalist society, people
                     depend on the market.
                        Unlike in earlier class societies (i.e., slavery or feudalism), coercion
                     under capitalism is peculiar in how impersonal it is: there is no over-
                     bearing figure to dictate the sale of our work. Whereas a serf would pay
                     part of the product of his labor to a lord because of the lord’s politi-
                     cal clout and the threat of physical retaliation, a Starbucks employee
                     “willingly” signs a work contract without any such personal pressure;
                     the pressure she experiences comes from the alternative, destitution.
                     Thus, in a capitalist society, she is inescapably bound by objective mar-



                     22




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   22        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        war and crisis


                     ket forces, a form of coercion qualitatively different from that of pre-
                     capitalist societies.
                         Politics, on the other hand, is the domain of states and govern-
                     ments, which means that political contestation may still occur under
                     capitalism—but not in a way that challenges the economic system. For
                     example, popular demands may include introducing a wealth tax or
                     the bolstering of labor rights, but abolishing private wealth and wage
                     labor is out of the question. The state therefore remains a neutral actor
                     with respect to the market, and its role rests primarily in safeguarding
                     private property and wage relations through the rule of law.
                         By the middle of the nineteenth century, with the establishment of
                     the gold standard and the institutionalization of financial orthodoxy
                     that emerged with it, capitalist class relations between owners and
                     workers became more entrenched, and any scenario for redistributive
                     demands in favor of the people was effectively blocked. The gold stan-
                     dard required states to secure a certain amount of gold in their coffers
                     so as to be able to make good on their promise to convert the cur-
                     rency into gold at a fixed price. Hence, states’ priority was to avoid the
                     outflow of gold, a priority that implied tight fiscal and monetary poli-
                     cies. Running a trade surplus was the surest way to build up a country’s
                     gold reserves. Conversely, trade deficits led to an outflow of gold, since
                     countries used gold to pay for their imports. Any extra public expen-
                     diture, or any easing of credit—the bases for redistributive policies—
                     would result in gold flights and were therefore nonstarters.
                         A tight fiscal budget, on the other hand, could bolster trade sur-
                     pluses by lowering domestic demand. And higher rates of interest
                     (which promised higher returns on capital while deterring imports as
                     they slowed the domestic economy) would draw gold bullion back into
                     the country. Hence, the imperative of fiscal and monetary rigor was
                     normalized.
                         Prior to the First World War, this “natural” order of things found
                     its sturdiest practice in Britain, the capitalist empire par excellence
                     for more than two hundred years, as well as in younger nation-states
                     such as Italy. But the war’s demand for domestic production quickly



                                                                                                       23




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   23        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     produced a complete subversion of such entrenched foundations—
                     suddenly capitalism did not appear to be so natural after all. There en-
                     sued a collapse of the divide between the economic and the political
                     that entailed the dwindling of the unchallenged status of the two pillars.
                        During the war, the state demolished its former boundaries of ac-
                     tion. Faced with the choice between life or death, victory or defeat, war
                     governments were forced into implementing economic practices that
                     were unheard of—or better, unimaginable—until that moment. The
                     self-regulating capacities of the market had proved inadequate for the
                     unprecedented productive necessities of the war struggle.
                        As will be discussed in chapter 1, British and Italian states were com-
                     pelled to take a major role as producers: key war industries were put
                     under their control. This included not just munitions, but also strategic
                     energy and transport sectors like coal, shipping, and railways. In this
                     respect, the once firm boundary between private property and public
                     property, between entrepreneurs and bureaucrats, lost its semblance of
                     immovability. Through war collectivism, states broke the glass on the
                     sanctity of the private organizations of production. For the first time,
                     these states also subordinated the priority of private economic profit to
                     that of political need. The collapse of the gold standard that followed
                     served to facilitate these novel political priorities. With it, spaces for
                     financial alternatives emerged that had not previously been thought of.
                        Meanwhile, a second fundamental boundary was also broken: the
                     states began to heavily regulate the labor market (including facets like
                     labor mobility, working conditions, and wages) across all key war in-
                     dustries, even those that it did not directly control. In doing so, the
                     state threatened the second capitalist pillar, wage relations. In the face
                     of these developments, workers facing lower wages and harsher disci-
                     pline were shown that their burdens were the result not of impersonal
                     market forces, but of explicit governmental decisions. The political in-
                     tervention on industrial relations, a necessity of the war, exposed how
                     relations of production could be a front for political activism and his-
                     torical change.
                        States had disrupted their neutral positions with respect to the mar-
                     ket, and in doing so they broke with earlier notions of the market’s


                     24




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   24        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        war and crisis


                     inviolability. Once the traditional boundary between the economic and
                     the political faltered, the rule of private property and wage relations
                     toppled: popular contestation of old norms emerged more than ever. In
                     1919 this crisis of capitalism was on, and it was unprecedented.
                        Most economic historians of World War I and the interwar period
                     focus on the “economic problems” facing countries because of the
                     monetary and financial outcomes of war: soaring inflation and mount-
                     ing debt had compromised countries’ creditworthiness, creating deep
                     uncertainty and threatening capital flight. But looking deeper at these
                     dynamics, it emerges that economic uncertainty was only a part of the
                     problem. Part of what this book will explore is how economic uncer-
                     tainty in these postwar countries had a political basis—indeed, how
                     the economic and political crises were inseparable, with the former
                     imposed by the latter. The postwar financial crisis was a crisis of legiti-
                     macy for capital order and its social relations.
                        The general public was noticing that state intervention within the
                     economy was not a neutral act in the name of the good of the whole,
                     but rather an authoritarian force to ensure the profit of the ruling
                     classes. Chapter 2 explores how pressure from below pushed states to
                     extend welfare measures in an attempt to appease their restless citi-
                     zens. However, while these measures were reformist in intention, they
                     were not so in their outcome. Indeed, they triggered further demands
                     to fundamentally eradicate the very capitalist pillars that states set out
                     to protect.
                        Put simply: the new, historic conditions of the war effort and the
                     interwar period allowed citizens, especially those in the working class,
                     to see that society could be different. The self-rationalizations of the
                     system were breaking down, and with their deterioration came pro-
                     posals for radical alternatives that could overcome them. Chapters
                     3 and 4 explore the political strikes and the movement for workers’
                     control that reached their climaxes after the war and became central
                     to labor’s charge in both Britain and Italy. In aggregate, these work-
                     ers demanded an overhaul of their economies, a replacement for the
                     capitalist industrial system that moved toward a new social order in
                     which associations of workers would control industries, either partially


                                                                                                       25




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   25        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     or completely. In this sense, emancipated work would replace capitalist
                     exploitation, and public service and production for use would replace
                     production for profit.
                        The popular struggles in the two countries examined here exempli-
                     fied the wide-ranging courses of action: from union campaigns that
                     successfully pierced the establishment, to the effective operation of
                     British building guilds that produced “for need” within the capitalist
                     market, all the way to Italian factory occupations that were led by revo-
                     lutionary workers’ councils.
                        In sum, the degree of state intervention during the war and the
                     heightening of class antagonism that it engendered constituted a great
                     revolutionary rupture from 1918 to 1920. It was the largest crisis in the
                     history of capitalism, embodied in the unprecedented popular mobili-
                     zation of strikes, alternative policy proposals, and alternative organiza-
                     tions of production. The logic of austerity can only be understood as a
                     dramatic reaction to this landscape.




                     26




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   26        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 1

                     The Great War and
                     the Economy




                            As the military struggle developed in scope and intensity, and the necessity
                            of concentrating national efforts on the war became more pressing, section
                            after section of industry was taken over, and in wages, prices and profits,
                            from raw material to finished product, was placed under Government con-
                            trol. The process of extending State control, taking over more works and ap-
                            plying it to an always “widening” range of products continued unbroken. . . .

                            The War Cabinet Report for the Year 1917 (His Majesty’s Stationery Office
                            1918a, 130)



                     World War I was primarily an industrial war: military victory vitally
                     depended on the production apparatus of the belligerent countries and
                     their technical-industrial efforts. Indeed, once expectations of a short
                     war faltered, an escalation of production was a prerequisite to survive
                     the conflict. The “home front” gained decisive strategic weight.
                        In this context, Britain and Italy faced a similar problem, albeit from
                     completely different positions. Britain was the world’s first industrial
                     power; Italy was still a largely agricultural country that had only re-
                     cently begun industrializing, and its young capitalism was still highly
                     dependent on foreign capital and imports. On the eve of the war, Italy’s
                     GDP (only a quarter of which was industrial) was less than half of Brit-
                     ain’s. In 1913 Britain produced nine times more steel than Italy, and for
                     other raw materials the disproportion was even greater.
                        Notwithstanding these major differences, the war effort brought


                                                                                                            27




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   27        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     about similar structural changes in the relationships between these
                     countries’ states and markets—changes that fueled profound politi-
                     cal contention in each. This chapter looks at the novel governmental
                     interventions in two economic spheres: production and labor. It also
                     explores the voices of contemporaries involved—both bureaucrats and
                     workers—to show how this epochal break from the past set the scene
                     for a full-blown crisis of capitalism.

                     A Remarkable Transformation

                     By the time the armistice that ended fighting in World War I arrived in
                     November 1918, the orthodox relationship between markets and states
                     across Europe had been wholly upset. There had been nothing like it
                     before: the practice of laissez-faire capitalism had to be dismantled for
                     nations to survive the war.
                         Britain went to war convinced of the power of what Adam Smith
                     described as the invisible hand: relying upon private enterprise and the
                     law of supply and demand to secure the most efficient outcomes, even
                     in war. E. M. H. Lloyd, a civil servant employed in the British war of-
                     fice, described the British establishment’s approach to the war effort:
                     “the doctrine implicitly acted upon was that the higher the price and
                     the greater the freedom allowed to the private contractor, the greater
                     would be the increase in the supply; it followed that if only the Gov-
                     ernment paid high enough prices and left private firms to their own
                     devices, munitions would be forthcoming in abundance” (Lloyd 1924,
                     23). Before long, business as usual did not deliver. By 1916 the failure of
                     laissez-faire and the free price mechanism was unmistakable. Increased
                     government demand and price increases led to profiteering, but did not
                     bring increased supplies. While the country suffered supply shortages
                     and inflation, private businesses diverted resources to the more profit-
                     able business lanes of the moment—luxury goods and exports.
                         The faith in the market took a while to dissipate. As British par-
                     liamentary secretary to the Ministry of Shipping Leo George Chiozza
                     Money wrote, only once “we had been brought to the edge of the abyss”
                     did the State give up “[d]octrinaire individualism” (Chiozza Money


                     28




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   28        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                     1920, 44, viii). The case of British shipping was exemplary, since, as
                     the British War Cabinet reported to Parliament, “if shipping failed we
                     could neither continue in the war nor maintain our population” (His
                     Majesty’s Stationery Office [hereafter HMSO] 1918a, 106). Once the
                     war broke out, the contrast between public needs and private interest
                     plainly surfaced: it was highly profitable to sell British ships to foreign-
                     ers, and the British nation lost enormous tonnage (see Chiozza Money
                     1920, 73). By February 1917, private shipowners sold ships abroad at
                     such a rate that “the fate of Britain literally hung in the balance” (Hur-
                     witz 1949, 194). There were not even sufficient ships to import the bare
                     necessities of a nation at war.
                         Reluctantly, British bureaucrats had to rethink their priorities, and
                     the words of civil servant Lloyd echoed this conversion: “National or-
                     ganization and centralized control were found to be more effective than
                     high prices and laissez-faire in stimulating supply” (Lloyd, 1924, 23).
                     Through “a series of fits and starts, improvisations and experiments”
                     (Cole 1923, xi–xii), the British state took charge of the vast range of the
                     nation’s economic activity and gradually developed an organic system
                     of controls. Its power reached into “almost every aspect of national
                     life” (Armitage 1969, 1). By 1918, “direct or indirect control of industry
                     and agriculture was virtually all-pervasive” (Pollard 1969, 47).
                         The shipping industry was again at the forefront of this shift. Once
                     a competent ministry was established, it requisitioned the entirety of
                     British merchant tonnage at Blue Book rates, meaning that the state
                     would pay the merchants a fixed freight rate. Hence, ships were nation-
                     alized as to use, and the government allocated tonnage according to the
                     priorities of import needs, privileging shorter trade routes that would
                     secure faster imports. In the meantime, state-owned shipyards took on
                     the task of construction (HMSO 1918a, 110–14). In the words of the his-
                     torian R. H. Tawney, “the Government was by that time master of the
                     whole field of land and sea transport” (Tawney 1943, 2).
                         Of course, war collectivism did not emerge from thin air, but from
                     dramatic financial gymnastics. World War I required a break from the
                     laissez-faire tradition of balanced budgets that for more than two cen-
                     turies had been “regarded by all except a tiny minority as part of the


                                                                                                       29




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   29        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     natural order of life” (Morgan 1952, 34). It fell in parallel with its equiv-
                     alent international policy, the gold standard. Until then, the gold stan-
                     dard had tied the hands of governments and prohibited engaging in
                     any fiscal or monetary expansion that would have produced an outflow
                     of gold. Once the constraints of the gold standard were suspended,
                     novel and unorthodox financial techniques—including loan-financed
                     investments and expansionary credit policies—became the order of
                     the day. Interventionist monetary policies could now yield resources
                     hitherto unthinkable.
                        In Italy, the same dynamics emerged: war collectivism was charac-
                     terized by improvisation and gradualism, all in a framework of gener-
                     alized skepticism toward breaking from laissez-faire. Soon, sweeping
                     state intervention became inescapable. Italy had to secure arms, mili-
                     tary equipment, food, raw material, and industrial labor force in a mo-
                     ment when international trade was dim and the majority of workers
                     had been sent to the front.
                        Observers at the time remarked on the country’s stark transition to a
                     “collectivist” state, a central planner of the national economy—or as the
                     Italian economist (and later, in 1948, president of the Republic) Luigi
                     Einaudi liked to put it, the emergence of an economia associata, or as-
                     sociated economy. In 1915, the economist Riccardo Bachi wrote: “The
                     State as a war entrepreneur has become the center, the pivot, the engine
                     of the entire economy” (Bachi 1916, viii). The Italian government had
                     initiated mild forms of interventionism to promote industrialization
                     through subsidies and infrastructure beginning in the late nineteenth
                     century (Zamagni 1990, 213–15). It was the unprecedented scale of this
                     practice during the war that shocked contemporaries. Prior to the war
                     the country’s real expenditures were 17 percent of nominal GDP; they
                     shot up to 40 percent in 1918 (Ciocca 2007, 172). While private con-
                     sumption grew by 6 percent from 1913 to 1918, the numbers for public
                     consumption were unheard of: rising by almost 500 percent.
                        As the Italian government intervened to promote capital accumula-
                     tion, it also transformed. First, it shouldered a major bureaucratic ex-
                     pansion. The new administrative state apparatus mirrored the increased



                     30




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   30        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                     economic commitment, multiplying in both ministries and public em-
                     ployees. The second major shift was toward a stronger state: executive
                     power grew to the detriment of the legislative (to meet the need for
                     rapid decisions, with no obstacles from political opposition) and it ex-
                     ecuted sweeping repressive practices over the population to annihilate
                     political dissent. This phenomenon in Italy reached extents that were
                     unknown in other parliamentary democracies (Procacci 1999, 13). With
                     the royal decree against defeatism of October 1917 (known as the Sacchi
                     decree), the state criminalized all freedom of opinion and thought, and
                     citizens lived in terror of being prosecuted—even for a mere complaint
                     about the high price of bread (see Procacci 2013, 107–33). It was a his-
                     toric turn within the Italian state toward authoritarianism, and much of
                     its legislation would be reanimated later by the Fascist regime.

                     State Control over Private Property and Production

                     During the war, the apparatus of governments’ industrial control was
                     broad and diverse. In most instances, states directly seized the means
                     of production in key war industries. This was the case for breweries,
                     national shipyards, and most importantly the arms sector, where the
                     government owned purpose-built national shell and munition factories
                     to make all types of munitions equipment, including airplanes, high
                     explosives, and tear gas. In Britain, by spring 1918, there were more
                     than 250 national factories, mines, and quarries (Tawney 1943, 2). Pub-
                     lic investment was impressive; it dramatically reshaped the landscape
                     to the point that “a whole country-side, as in the case of [the Southern
                     Scottish town] Gretna, became a factory” (Wolfe 1923, 65; on Gretna see
                     also Chiozza Money 1920, 62–64).
                         Likewise, the Italian state owned 60 munitions factories; by 1917 it
                     had seized the right to requisition plants and take direct control of the
                     production process in cases of inefficient private management. This
                     legislation was preceded by other actions that expropriated private
                     property, even without consent. Such expropriations included gov-
                     ernment seizure of industrial patents in order to orient them toward



                                                                                                       31




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   31        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     national security. The same was true for all goods and services con-
                     sidered necessary for war purposes (see De Stefani 1926a, 412–13 and
                     Miozzi 1980, 41–42).
                        Most common, in both Britain and Italy, was the model of directly
                     managing firms still under private ownership, an arrangement in which
                     the state imposed and controlled outputs and fixed prices. The British
                     Munitions Act of July 2, 1915, gave the Ministry of Munitions power
                     to control any private establishment essential to war production and
                     to limit the establishments’ profits at 20 percent above prewar levels.
                     In Italy, a royal decree of June 26, 1915 (Royal Decree 997, in GU 177
                     [June 26, 1915]) on industrial mobilization empowered the government
                     to classify as “stabilimenti ausiliari” [auxiliary factories] all private in-
                     dustries that were involved in producing necessary war supplies, or in-
                     dustries that had the potential to produce war material (see Article 13,
                     reprinted in Franchini 1928, 96–97). Clearly, these categories were ex-
                     tremely broad and could include private establishments in all sectors of
                     the economy. Italy had 221 auxiliary factories in 1915; by the end of the
                     war it had 1,976. In Britain, factories under the Ministry of Munitions’
                     control numbered about 20,000 (Tawney 1943, 2). In both countries,
                     government-controlled businesses encompassed coal—“the blood
                     which coursed through British [and Italian] industry”—as well as im-
                     portant transportation sectors (shipping, railways), mining, quarrying,
                     clothing, paper, wood, leather, agriculture, public utilities, metallurgy,
                     textiles, and chemicals.
                        The complexity of the state-control system mirrored the intercon-
                     nectedness of the capitalist economy, which was itself blurred by mar-
                     kets’ monetary transactions. Let me elaborate through an example. In a
                     capitalist monetary economy, a person goes to the market and buys
                     a woolen jacket in exchange for money—a simple transaction. Such
                     a monetary exchange, however, is only what occurs at the surface.
                     It hides the heterogenous inner workings of production: the mak-
                     ing of the woolen jacket requires workers to extract coal (necessary
                     to transport wool), to rear the sheep, to weave, etcetera. In capitalist
                     economies before the war and today, the relationship between money
                     and commodities hides the underlying social relationships of produc-


                     32




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   32        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                     tion. Accordingly, under capitalism, relationships between people are
                     expressed as relationships between things. War collectivism brought
                     these social interconnections into view. In the example of wool (which
                     was important for clothing both civilians and the army), the govern-
                     ment took on all stages of its production, including those that were
                     hidden under capitalism.
                        The reach of both the British Ministry of Munitions and its Italian
                     counterpart, the Ministry of War and Munitions, illustrate the states’
                     central roles in co-opting their countries’ industrial mobilization. Their
                     operations were akin to an octopus with tentacles reaching across en-
                     tire economies. Control of munitions production soon led to control
                     of essential raw materials, factory space, and sources of power and
                     labor (see Wrigley in Burk 1982, 46). These ministries also developed
                     research departments for technical innovations and conducted experi-
                     ments in chemistry, physics, electronics, and other fields.
                        In the Italian case, production took place through a chain of cen-
                     tralized directives disseminated via regional committees. These seven
                     (later eleven) regional committees were the first organs of “industrial
                     planning” [programmazione economica]; they directed the production
                     process of the auxiliary factories, collected technical information, dis-
                     tributed electric energy and raw material, and (notably) disciplined the
                     labor force.
                        Italian manufacturing during the war was fueled by state-run agri-
                     culture; the state mandated the farming of certain crops and decided on
                     the use of the country’s land. The department of agrarian mobilization
                     [reparto di mobilitazione agraria] under the Ministry of Agriculture
                     became the main superintendent of these matters. It controlled the
                     production and distribution of fertilizers, and purchased machines to
                     mechanize production. The ministry also requisitioned seeds and pri-
                     vate agricultural machines for use all over the country.
                        In 1917 the British Cultivation of Lands Order gave local authorities
                     the power to seize private land, even without owners’ consent, for the
                     creation of allotments to supplement farm production (Hurwitz 1949,
                     216). These requisition practices for national productive and distribu-
                     tive needs—visibly encroaching on the sanctity of private property—


                                                                                                       33




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   33        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     were complemented by national laws that granted citizens the right to
                     occupy lands and facilities. The measures were crucial to hasten social
                     appeasement, satisfy the subsistence needs of the population, and avoid
                     the worst forms of social unrest. In 1917 the Italian government granted
                     cooperatives of peasants the right to occupy land in the case of noncom-
                     pliant [inadempienti] landowners. As we shall investigate in chapters 3
                     and 4, these reforms actually sparked a political movement advocating
                     for “land to the peasants” that reached its peak immediately after the war.
                         Even with these modest measures of appeasement, Italy saw wide-
                     spread protests brought about by a grave lack of basic foodstuffs, espe-
                     cially in the cities (bread in Turin; rice in Lombardy; oil in Livorno).
                     After much uncertainty and delay, in 1916 the state repealed the free-
                     market mechanism for household supplies and inaugurated “a vast
                     nationalization of food commerce” (Bachi 1926, 158) that included the
                     state purchase and distribution of food; price caps; requisitions (for ex-
                     ample of cereal and livestock); and rationing. In Britain too, by 1918,
                     the Ministry of Food was buying and selling over four-fifths of all food
                     consumed by civilians. It fixed the maximum prices of over nine-tenths
                     of the population’s food.
                         States’ interventions in the economy promoted a public sense that
                     basic necessities were now an inalienable right—and that the govern-
                     ment was obliged to secure them. The priorities of the economy had
                     radically shifted, from profit for a few to securing the needs of the
                     many. In Italy, “rationing was practiced for many commodities, at times
                     also for non-general consumption-goods, bringing about the perhaps
                     unwanted result of acquainting to certain consumption habits certain
                     social classes to whom they were previously almost unknown” (Bachi
                     1926, 165). These measures escalated aspirations for a better standard of
                     life after the war (ibid., 166–67).
                         International markets were also subject to breach by state interven-
                     tion. Given the heavy dependence of Britain and Italy on foreign goods,
                     both governments had to take control of the importing and distribu-
                     tion of raw material, commodities, and foodstuffs. Each government
                     became its country’s greatest importer, and bulk purchases on the in-
                     ternational markets allowed governments to fix prices at lower rates.


                     34




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   34        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                        In sum, in all the ways discussed above—from industrial produc-
                     tion to land cultivation and price-fixing—the British and Italian states
                     barged into the realm of the economic. For the first time, capitalism
                     witnessed a threat to the inviolability of private property. Private prop-
                     erty had to subordinate its prerogatives to a political and national inter-
                     est and even to people’s basic needs. In this way the state shook one of
                     the supposedly unshakeable pillars of capital accumulation. The trem-
                     ors in laissez-faire capitalism did not stop here, however, reverberating
                     to another fundamental pillar: wage relations.

                     State Control over Wage Relations

                     A market economy requires a pool of unemployed workers who are
                     ready to be hired to meet increased production demands. Within a cap-
                     italist society, these people are structurally competing with one another.
                     The presence of these individuals guarantees lower labor costs (because
                     workers are replaceable) and “naturally” disciplines the workers, who
                     have an incentive to keep their jobs and paychecks. Under normal con-
                     ditions, the reserve army of labor is replenished by the very process of
                     capital accumulation: in their competition to lower commodity prices,
                     capitalists constantly seek out new technological innovation, which in
                     turn expels a segment of the working class from the process of pro-
                     duction. The reserve army is further replenished by mechanization, in
                     which the process of production is simplified or automated, and skilled
                     workers are made expendable.
                         World War I caused a shift in the power relations between capital
                     and labor. As the demand for labor soared with the intensification of
                     war production, employers were confronted with a labor shortage: the
                     draft and voluntary enlistment had depleted the reserve army of labor.
                     In Britain, for example, a third of the male labor force was enlisted.
                     This meant that the mechanism of the free market could no longer ef-
                     fectively distribute labor where it was most needed.
                         To add to the woes of the market, reaching voluntary agreements
                     between capital and labor was a lengthy process, often involving dis-
                     putes and labor stoppages that tended to intensify in moments of la-


                                                                                                       35




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   35        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     bor strength, disrupting efficient war production. It followed that the
                     prewar tradition of self-regulation and industrial autonomy had to be
                     abandoned in favor of forceful state regulation. As observed by Hum-
                     bert Wolfe, controller of the labor-regulation department at the British
                     Ministry of Munitions, “[l]abour ceased to be a commodity to which
                     the laws of supply and demand applied” (Wolfe 1923, 102).
                        In Britain, almost 5 million workers were employed by 1918 in firms
                     operating under the Munitions Act, accounting for roughly half of the
                     available male labor force. The purpose of the legislation was to tackle
                     the major obstacles to efficient output, summarized by Wolfe, who fa-
                     thered the scheme, as “interruptions of work by stoppages, failure to
                     put forth the full amount of energy during work, either owing to Trade
                     Union restriction or to indiscipline, doubt as to wages, resentment
                     against employers’ profits, opposition to dilution of labour, and the ten-
                     dency of labour not to stay where it was most actively required or to des-
                     ert important work for less important work more highly paid” (1923, 101).
                        The Italian state took over the labor market with the same purpose
                     and with means that closely resembled those in Britain, but it went
                     much further in exercising its repressive sway on the workforce. The
                     implicit coercion of the laws of the capitalist market was now replaced
                     with unprecedented political coercion. This was to a great extent the
                     expression of the state’s crude reaction to a labor force that was firmly
                     anti-statist and pacifist; suffice to say that the Italian state did not en-
                     joy the wartime support of its public majority. Indeed, Italy was the
                     only European country that went to war without the official support
                     of any working-class party or any union. The disgruntled rank and file
                     shared the opinion that “the horrendous war is the fatal outcome of
                     the capitalist system, which, born in violence deludes itself by finding
                     in violence the solution of its crisis.” As General Dallolio, head of the
                     Ministry of War and Munitions, spelled out, the work of Italy’s regional
                     committees had as a priority to tackle “the very delicate problem of
                     maintaining control on the working class, whose union and political
                     organizations had openly manifested an aversion for war intervention.”
                        By June 1915 the Italian state had taken direct control of almost
                     one million workers (902,000) working in two thousand industrial


                     36




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   36        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                     businesses—the great majority of the industrial apparatus. In both
                     countries state control consisted of regulation in three large domains:
                     supply of labor (both its increase and its mobility); cost of labor; and
                     efficiency of labor. What follows is a very brief exploration of each.

                     Disciplining Labor

                     Increasing productivity required disciplined workers. During the war,
                     the Italian government replaced private capitalists as the main guaran-
                     tor of labor discipline.
                         In doing so, the Italian government came up with a drastic measure:
                     the militarization of the labor force—a form of extreme duress that the
                     British trade unions successfully opposed. This meant that once a firm
                     was declared auxiliary, all personnel from head technicians to work-
                     ers, including “women, the elderly, and children [i fanciulli],” fell un-
                     der military jurisdiction (Einaudi 1933, 111). Hence, the advent of the
                     phenomenon of “factory-barracks,” as the union leader Bruno Buozzi
                     described them. Indeed, workers were formally equated to soldiers;
                     they surrendered to forced labor, and were subjected to a rigid work
                     regimen based on the penal code and enforced by military agents.
                     Unauthorized absence from work was often likened to desertion.
                         It is noteworthy that some private capitalists aspired to achieve the
                     status of auxiliary factories, as it would guarantee the submission of the
                     workers “to a rigorous discipline of military nature, the suppression of
                     strikes and workers upheavals” (Einaudi 1933, 105). Collective organiza-
                     tion of workers, insubordination, obstructionism, and sabotage were
                     especially punished. The state was strict with its workers: by the end
                     of the war 50 percent of Italian workers had been fined at some point.
                     Other common penalties that especially impacted militants and union
                     leaders were dismissal, prison, confinement to marginal areas, and, in
                     the case of enlisted workers, a return to the front (see Procacci 1999
                     and 1983).
                         In Britain, even if repression was not overtly militaristic, the Min-
                     istry of Munitions removed many disciplinary powers from employers
                     to directly enforce a draconian order of work regulation. Not only


                                                                                                       37




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   37        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     were strikes outlawed; the Ministry also prosecuted misconduct such
                     as drunkenness, gambling, or absence from work without permission.
                     Cases of bad timekeeping were not exempt from discipline, and were
                     officially attributed to “indifference” and “temperamental laziness”
                     (memo of Ministry of Munitions, reprinted in Rubin 1987, 179–80).
                        To achieve desired outcomes, governments used the parallel strategy
                     of softening the antagonism with labor. The British War Cabinet Report
                     recognized that accelerated mechanization during the war had “aggra-
                     vated” the feeling “that industry was becoming dehumanised” (HMSO
                     1918a, 100). The worker “[w]anted more individual consideration and
                     some voice in the determination of the conditions under which he
                     should work” (ibid.). Coercive methods had to be integrated alongside
                     policies that would elicit consent and promote cooperation. Hence, in
                     the report of the following year, the War Cabinet championed the in-
                     tention to satisfy “the public mind,” which had been “prepared for a
                     new order of things in industry after the war,” a new order that would
                     offer a “more democratic basis, if there is to be lasting peace in the
                     industrial world” (HMSO 1919a, 145, 149).
                        To codify these promises, the Ministry of Labour approved the 1917
                     recommendation to establish Whitley councils (named after MP J. H.
                     Whitley) to represent both employers and trade unions and to dis-
                     cuss not only wages and work conditions but also job security, tech-
                     nical education, and improvements in management. By September
                     1920, sixty-one councils were in operation representing over 3,500,000
                     workers (Miller 1924, 17). However, the radical rank and file agitated
                     strongly against the Whitley councils on the grounds that the scheme
                     was an attempt to lure workers into accepting class collaboration that
                     would work to the advantage of the employer class. Workers attacked
                     the state’s move in favor of Whitley councils as “a red herring to draw
                     the workers away from the real struggle for workers control in indus-
                     try,” also claiming that the councils “perpetuated the class division in
                     society and left the whole profit-making system of capitalism intact”
                     (Hannington 1941, 72).
                        As the war dragged on, protests among workers in Italy mounted,
                     and fears of a revolutionary rupture emerged. It became increasingly


                     38




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   38        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                     obvious to officials that law and order alone might not suffice to mollify
                     workers. Following the British model, the government offered a sem-
                     blance of involvement of workers in industrial mobilization. For ex-
                     ample, within the Regional Industrial Committees, the representatives
                     of the industrialists nominated by the Ministry were joined by an equal
                     number of labor representatives, often union members such as Buozzi,
                     who joined the Committee of the Lombardy region.
                        Most importantly, in both countries internal factory committees
                     took on an increasingly representative role. These were grievance com-
                     mittees elected by union members within a factory to handle everyday
                     problems of discipline, arbitration, and the like. The war boosted the
                     development of workers’ assemblies to elect their representatives in
                     the committees, increasing union membership within the unskilled
                     rank and file (see Tomassini in Menozzi et al. 2010, 43–44; see also
                     Bezza 1982). In this way, in both countries, the seeds of workers’ self-
                     organization were planted during the war. As will be detailed in chap-
                     ter 4, by 1919 these committees would grow into a concrete alternative
                     to the capitalist mode of production.

                     Coping with a Small Labor Supply

                     Wartime states seized control of the supply of labor to tackle the prob-
                     lem of manpower shortages. A basic step in this direction was to ex-
                     pand the pool of available workers through the process of dilution: i.e.,
                     the introduction of unskilled labor, including women, in jobs formerly
                     reserved for skilled men. As mentioned, dilution is integral to capitalist
                     production where the competition among capitalists and the pressure
                     from workers induces the capitalist constantly to cut costs by techno-
                     logical innovation and more efficient reorganization of the labor pro-
                     cess. During the war, countries greatly boosted this tendency through
                     increased mechanization of production, which broke the work process
                     into simple stages that less skilled workers could manage. As the British
                     Women’s Employment Committee confirmed, women “have replaced
                     men in iron and steel works, in chemical works, in brickyards and in
                     gasworks . . . sub-division, sectionalisation, and above all, the introduc-


                                                                                                       39




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   39        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     tion of mechanical assistance has enabled their employment on work
                     previously regarded as beyond their strength” (Ministry of Reconstruc-
                     tion 1919, Cd. 9239, p. 14).
                        To increase the pool of labor, Italy removed its limits on worker
                     age and on women’s labor. By August 1918, Italian women represented
                     22 percent of the labor force (198,000 women), while children ac-
                     counted for 6.5 percent (60,000 children).
                        With the war, then, came the birth of a “new working class” that was
                     widely expanded and unskilled, composed of a large number of peas-
                     ants, artisans, women, and adolescents. This new social component was
                     foreign to the hierarchical dynamics of organized labor, and thus po-
                     tentially more insubordinate—and prone to radicalization.
                        An alternative to expanding the pool of available labor was to in-
                     crease the extraction of surplus value from the employed workers by
                     intensifying the production process and extending the working day.
                     The Italians put both measures into widespread practice. The govern-
                     ment extended the operating schedules of “auxiliary” establishments by
                     abolishing hour limits and Sunday rests. Regional committees’ meeting
                     minutes document incessant work activity, with almost no breaks, that
                     could easily reach 15 or 16 hours a day (Camarda and Peli 1980, 158–
                     59). Overtime work became compulsory. The government even sus-
                     pended the prohibition on night work for women and children in cases
                     where it “was deemed necessary for the works in the interest of the state
                     and for other absolute needs of public interest” (De Stefani 1926a, 22).
                     The unparalleled strain on Italian and British workers was mirrored
                     by the growth of accidents in the workplace and by the multiplication
                     of absences—often a matter of survival. In a moment where workers
                     were not substitutable, there was a thin line between overexploitation
                     and collapse of productivity due to exhaustion. This realization pushed
                     the British government to establish a Health and Munitions workers
                     committee that investigated overwork and advocated for the decrease
                     of working hours and the abolition of night work. Although no such
                     committee was established in Italy, as we shall see in chapter 2, the gov-
                     ernment did implement provisions to improve health conditions to
                     assure the reproduction of the labor force.


                     40




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   40        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                        Piecework—or payment based on result—was rare before the war.
                     The state generalized it so as to make it the decisive part of workers’
                     wages, and it was understood as the best incentive to increase pro-
                     ductivity. In both countries, initially, this meant greater compensation
                     for the unskilled relative to the skilled, as the latter’s specialized work
                     normally delivered less in the same amount of time. Notwithstanding
                     the initial grievances among skilled workers (see Cole 1923, 165–66),
                     the levelling and flattening of wages had the important political conse-
                     quence of setting the basis for a class unity amongst workers that did
                     not exist prior to 1914.
                        Beyond the expansion of the pool of workers and their greater
                     exploitation, the government had to undertake a number of plan-
                     ning tasks to compensate for the inability of the laws of the market
                     to distribute labor power efficiently among industries. Political control
                     over labor mobility allowed the government to shift work wherever it
                     deemed necessary.
                        The role of employment exchanges, or public employment agencies,
                     grew exponentially in both countries. They undertook the delicate
                     task of adjusting supply and demand through central analysis of the
                     labor supply and a “scientific classification of man-power” (Wolfe 1923,
                     69). In Italy, for example, by 1918 a central office of employment coor-
                     dinated all public employment agencies. It collected data regarding the
                     labor market, while studying optimal allocative solutions (De Stefani
                     1926a, 17).
                        On the other hand, limits were also imposed on the mobility of la-
                     bor. In Britain, section 7 of the Ministry of Munitions Act prevented
                     workers from transferring freely from one job to another by requiring
                     workmen to obtain a leaving certificate before engaging in alternative
                     employment. This harsh provision had a twofold motive. First, the de-
                     pletion of the reserve army of labor gave workers enhanced bargaining
                     power, which forced employers to bid up wages in order to attract avail-
                     able labor, especially skilled labor. By imposing a political limit on such
                     mobility, the government could ensure a cap on wages. Second, these
                     certificates also prevented the constant turnover of labor, which ham-
                     pered the production process. These leaving certificates were highly


                                                                                                       41




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   41        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     unpopular (Hurwitz 1949, 107), and were fiercely contested as a slavery
                     clause. The rank and file all over the country revolted against a measure
                     that tied the hands of the employee but not the employer, who was left
                     free to fire his workers and was not compelled to issue a certificate even
                     once he fired them. Through union bargaining, the certificates were
                     repealed in October 1917.
                        In Italy there was no public pushback powerful enough to inhibit the
                     political assault on the bargaining power of workers. The military-state
                     apparatus broke the resistance capacity of the skilled workers’ unions,
                     especially FIOM (Federazione Impiegati e Operai Metallurgici), the
                     union of the metal and steel workers. Dismissals, resignations, and
                     transfers of personnel from one industry to another could occur only
                     with the written authorization of the Regional Committees (CRMI),
                     which had full decision-making power on the matter and observed
                     much stricter criteria than applied to the leaving certificates in Brit-
                     ain (Franchini 1928, 99). Workers’ anger mounted against a state that
                     forbade any benefit from the war, “to the point that, notwithstanding
                     the enormous demand for labor their [workers’] pay has not increased
                     during the war not even in the same proportion as the cost of living”
                     (Buozzi, in Bezza 1982, 84).

                     Setting the Price of Labor

                     Under laissez-faire capitalism, wages were mainly settled through local
                     bargains between labor and capital; governments had no say in the pro-
                     cess. This changed during the war: industrialists competed for scarce
                     labor through wage increases, while mounting worker mobilizations
                     (to cope with the concurrent increases in cost of living) also pushed for
                     higher wages. Here the state did intervene, acting promptly against this
                     threat to capital accumulation by taking control of wage contracts. The
                     words of the historian Samuel Hurwitz hold true for both countries:
                     “it would be a mistake to think that on the whole the British worker
                     was better off because of Government intervention. State interference
                     in wage settlements ‘acted to keep the level of wages rather lower than
                     would have otherwise been the case’” (Hurwitz 1949, 129).


                     42




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   42        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                        The state also worked to simplify and unify wage rates and avoid the
                     lengthy and disruptive processes of wage disputes that hindered capital
                     accumulation and thus war output. Toward these goals the Italian and
                     British government established mandatory arbitration tribunals that
                     mediated between workers and employers in lieu of strikes and lock-
                     outs. It was a significant leap: “from this time labour could not (if the
                     law were obeyed) enforce a wages demand, or an objection to a work-
                     man’s dismissal, or an alteration in workshop conditions, by a strike”
                     (Wolfe 1923, 102).
                        In Britain, the newly founded Committee on Production quickly
                     developed into the principal arbitration tribunal for the settlement
                     of labor disputes. It was a body of government officials, later joined
                     by certain employers and trade union representatives, that pioneered
                     the use of the cost-of-living index for the purpose of fixing wages and
                     war bonuses. The complaints of an employer published in the Glasgow
                     Herald articulated the economic power of this governmental body: “at
                     the present time, the payer of wages has hardly any voice in the fixing of
                     them. This is done, for the most part, without any reference to employ-
                     ers by a [Government] Committee on Production” (Glasgow Herald,
                     September 25, 1917, reprinted in Rubin 1987, 22).
                        In fact, as employers knew, even during the conflict the state was
                     often pressured to safeguard against excessive exploitation of unskilled
                     labor. In Britain, for example, in 1916 organized workers forced the
                     government to amend the Munitions Act to stipulate that unskilled
                     workers—when employed in place of the skilled—could not receive
                     lower pay.
                        Meanwhile, the newly established Ministry of Labour enacted pro-
                     visions to regulate Britain’s “ill-organised and ill-paid industries”—to
                     establish some minimal working standards (HMSO 1918a). The minis-
                     try was engaged in “making enquiry as to wages and conditions” and
                     had the power to establish trade boards at a rapid pace, through a spe-
                     cial order not subject to parliamentary scrutiny. The boards extended
                     to a wide range of non-unionized industries, and were responsible for
                     setting minimum wages and improving the conditions of work.
                        As for Italy, mandatory arbitration was in the hands of the regional


                                                                                                       43




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   43        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     committees, which, in case of failed agreement among the employ-
                     ers and workers, would decide by ordinance. In reality, the country’s
                     adoption of the principle of equal treatment was an embellishment: in
                     auxiliary factories the state froze wages at their prewar level until three
                     months after the end of the war (sanctioned by Royal Decree 1277, Au-
                     gust 22, 1915, in De Stefani 1926a, 420). As a practical matter, workers
                     had no choice but to take on an increasing amount of overtime work
                     to compensate for soaring food prices. This hard reality was very much
                     at odds with the polemic on high wages that was vocally mounted by
                     the bourgeoisie during the last years of the war (see Frascani 1975, 69).
                        In sum, the war brought about an unprecedented degree of state
                     control over labor. In setting the price of labor, disciplining it, and con-
                     trolling its supply, the Italian and British governments had exposed the
                     profoundly political nature of the capitalist economy. No longer was
                     surplus extraction a matter of mere economic coercion executed by
                     the impersonal laws of the market; exploitation was now enforced by
                     state intervention. This meant that surplus extraction became explicitly
                     political, emblematically represented by the fact that Italian workers
                     who refused to sell their labor power would be condemned to prison
                     or to the front. The basis was set for those who were living through
                     these changes to gain awareness of the link between economic power
                     and political power. The full consequences were cropping up: if eco-
                     nomic power is political, it means there is nothing natural about eco-
                     nomic power, and the systems by which it is distributed can be changed
                     through struggle. As we shall see in greater detail in chapter 4, anti-
                     statism and anti-capitalism went hand in hand.

                     The Consequences of a Remarkable Transformation

                     The Vision of the Bureaucrats

                     The impact of the Great War could not have been imagined before it
                     actually happened. Britain—the major capitalist economy up until the
                     war—experienced extensive nationalization of the means of produc-
                     tion, and young capitalist countries like Italy followed in its footsteps.


                     44




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   44        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                        The unprecedented political control over private property and wage
                     relations had groundbreaking social consequences with potential to
                     change the face of free-market capitalism, or even abolish it completely.
                     These consequences could be felt all around the world.
                        Inside the government apparatus, many bureaucrats, politicians, and
                     prominent intellectuals had been converted to belief in the benefits of
                     nationalization and envisaged it as a long-lasting structural change. The
                     war, many felt, “marked the end of an epoch”; there was no “return-
                     ing to the uncovenanted mercies of pre-war individualism” (Tawney
                     1943, 11). The involvement of the state exposed the irrationality of the
                     market—that it was “wasteful” and “anti-social”—and showed the pos-
                     sibility that it might be overcome.
                        In 1918 the British War Cabinet noted that “[t]he nation today is far
                     better organized and far more productive than it has ever been before”
                     (HMSO 1918a, xvi). And indeed, the controlled economy delivered be-
                     yond anyone’s expectations. Despite a dearth of material, losses at sea,
                     and the shortage of manpower, the total output of British industry had
                     hardly declined at all during the war (Pollard 1969, 53–54).
                        Against deep-seated market beliefs, the methods of scientific pricing
                     and national organization were far from ineffective; in fact they had
                     rationalized nationwide systems of production and distribution. Food
                     control had successfully responded to high food prices to the point
                     that total consumption in terms of calories per adult male fell only
                     very slightly, and distribution was “much more equitable in war than
                     in peace” (Pollard 1969, 51). Moreover, the Ministry of Munitions left
                     quite an impression on contemporaries for its administrative successes,
                     especially in its capacity to invest and transmit innovative technology
                     and management practices to the firms under its control (Wrigley, in
                     Burk 1982, 47–49).
                        In his 1920 pamphlet The Triumph of Nationalization, the British
                     economist Leo George Chiozza Money asked why, if the principles of
                     national organization had proven so successful to win the war, they
                     should not be expanded in peacetime. “The foundation for a new and
                     better order had been well and truly laid” (Chiozza Money 1920, 137–
                     38). These thoughts echoed those expressed in the official British War


                                                                                                       45




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   45        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     Cabinet documents: “Reconstruction,” it was insisted, “is not so much a
                     question of rebuilding society as it was before the war, but of moulding
                     a better world out of the social and economic conditions which have
                     come into being during the war” (HMSO 1918a, xix).
                        Such words were not outliers: they represented a common sentiment
                     widely present within the British public debate. The opening speech of
                     incumbent prime minister Lloyd George at the November 1918 coali-
                     tion election campaign was eloquent: “We cannot return to the old con-
                     ditions. (Cheers.) War is like a ploughshare and a harrow. It has turned
                     up and rent the soil of Europe. You cannot go back.”
                        Nationalization seemed like a permanent path forward. At a cam-
                     paign stop in Dundee in December 1918, even the liberal Winston
                     Churchill advocated nationalization of the railways, endorsing the pro-
                     posal of the railway nationalization society that the government acquire
                     the railway stocks. After the armistice, the Ministry of Reconstruction
                     presented wide-ranging plans for public spending while, as we shall see
                     in chapter 3, the British government called the Sankey committee to
                     discuss the permanent nationalization of coal.
                        In Italy, the same was true. Notwithstanding the exorbitant costs,
                     corruption, and managerial problems—much of which the enquiry on
                     war expenditures exposed for all to see—the Italian war effort proved
                     impressive: within just a few years of nationalization, the country was
                     equipped with a military arsenal that was not much inferior to the other
                     belligerent powers (Romeo 1972, 116), even producing more cannons
                     than Britain itself (7,709 vs. 6,690) and exporting military equipment.
                     In those years, northern Italy completed the industrial transformation
                     that had been initiated at the beginning of the century.
                        Wartime documents of the Italian Ministry of Arms and Munitions
                     reveal that many leaders envisioned the role of the regional and central
                     committees not as an exception for the war effort, but rather as a more
                     long-lasting economic turn (see Zaganella 2017, 192–94). The monthly
                     bulletins of the central committee were inundated with tributes. War
                     mobilization was lauded as “a really grandiose phenomenon”—“an in-
                     struction” for the future.



                     46




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   46        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                        The praise was not ubiquitous. As we will see in the second part of
                     this book, enemies to national control were powerful and very wor-
                     ried. Men of the British Treasury, along with many in the British and
                     Italian liberal elite and its professional economists, formed a united
                     front against “state socialism.” Their worries were indeed justified: all
                     around them, opposition was being sown to challenge the once immov-
                     able institutions of private property and wage relations.

                     The Vision of the Workers

                     As chapters 2–4 will explore in depth, the interwar challenge to the
                     pillars of capitalism came primarily from the working classes, people
                     who had witnessed firsthand how capitalist relations of production—
                     and their exploitative nature—were no longer governed by impersonal
                     “laws of the market,” but rather resulted from explicit political choices.
                        The rhetoric of “the equality of sacrifice” appeared empty in the face
                     of soaring profits of industrial capital and speculation on the one end,
                     and insufficient wages to cope with the mounting prices of basic living
                     necessities on the other. Headlines from the Daily Herald, the inde-
                     pendent daily of the British Left, denounced what workers widely saw
                     as criminal political choices: “Merciless Exploitation: Labour Calls on
                     Government to Reduce Cost of Living or Resign” (July 10, 1919) and
                     “Penalty of Being Poor: How Workers Struggle Daily to Exist Under
                     Present High Prices. Forced to Work Overtime” (August 26, 1919).
                        The August 1919 article went on: “A constant struggle, not to live, but
                     to merely exist, is the penalty of being poor during the era of the profi-
                     teer. From various parts of the country reports are coming to us show-
                     ing clearly and conclusively how the workers are suffering from the
                     high prices.” A day prior, the description was even more disheartening:
                     “The margin between income and expenditure is so narrow that the
                     purchase of other household sundries . . . has to be met with a reduc-
                     tion, or the absolute denial of necessary food. . . . I have spoken to many
                     working-class women, who have told me that they have not bought
                     any new clothing for many months, and their appearance was adequate



                                                                                                       47




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   47        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     proof of the statement. Not for a longer period had they had as much
                     amusement as even a cheap seat in a cinema theatre. The traditional
                     indulgence of a glass of beer is rapidly becoming a thing of the past.”
                         While it is true that the British imposed caps on sale prices and limits
                     on profits, these measures did not antagonize private capital. Rather,
                     private capital had cooperated, securing for itself guaranteed fixed
                     dividends and substantial economic advantages. Moreover, the wind-
                     fall opportunities that came with compelling trade unions to abandon
                     their restrictive practices (for example, on work hours and wage flex-
                     ibility) and a license to impose tighter factory discipline outweighed
                     any disadvantage of the modest profit limitation (Rubin 1987, 19). The
                     British government also footed the bill for the reproduction of the la-
                     bor force through welfare measures. In other words, these costs were
                     transferred from the private capitalists to the community at large—i.e.,
                     a process of socialization of the cost of reproduction. As embattled
                     British labor leaders would declaim, the government was “compelled
                     to drop its mask of impartiality and appear in its true character as an
                     instrument of class domination” (Gallacher and Campbell 1972, 6).
                         In Italy, as in Britain, during the war the state assisted capitalists
                     with deference. It became the main supplier and client of industry; it
                     procured raw material, acted as guarantor of bank credits and as dis-
                     cipliner of the labor force; and it provided subsidies and coordinated
                     effort (see De Stefani 1926a, 144–55). During the war Italian capital-
                     ists gained exponentially more; unlike in Britain, the Italian state had
                     no ceiling on profits. Industrialists ably justified price increases while
                     the government lacked any serious tool to account for their production
                     costs, ultimately accepting and buying at inflated prices. Purchasing
                     contracts were often made informally, and negligence, abuse, and fraud
                     were the ordinary state of things. The state granted tax breaks to abet
                     the capitalists further (Segreto 1982, 42–43). The metallurgical and me-
                     chanical sector especially benefited. Large industries like Fiat, Ilva, and
                     Ansaldo had increased their workforce tenfold (Zaganella 2017, 190).
                     Fiat alone was producing fifteen times more vehicles in 1918 than in
                     1914 (more than 90 percent of which were for the Italian government).
                     Overall, the automobile sector increased its revenue from 32 million in


                     48




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   48        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                     1913 to 160 million in 1918. The surge in profits confirmed the expecta-
                     tion of many Italian capitalists who had strongly supported war inter-
                     vention as an opportunity to get out of the overproduction trap while
                     minimizing their dependence on foreign capital (Porisini 1975, 8).
                        No one could deny that the state was intervening not as a universal
                     benevolent actor but rather as the promoter of the “best” conditions for
                     capital accumulation, which implied the subordination of workers and
                     the concentration of exorbitant profits in a few hands. The ideology
                     of national unity—so fundamental for the sanctity of capitalism—was
                     crumbling, thereby providing an unprecedented boost to social antago-
                     nism and ideas of radical change.
                        This was especially true in Italy, where the population had never
                     been fully ideologically incorporated within the state. This gulf between
                     the spirit of the people and the Italian state had grown even greater over
                     the course of World War I. The fact that the decision to enter the war
                     had been taken by King Vittorio Emanuele III and a few others without
                     parliamentary consultation diffused among the people a sense of being
                     “deceived and violated” (ingannato e violentato, Tasca 1965, 11). This
                     deception was palpable as real wages shrank by 20 percent during the
                     war years. Indeed, just between 1917 and 1918 the cost-of-living index
                     increased by 40 percent (Frascani 1975, 60)—gravely worsening the liv-
                     ing standards of the working classes, both in industry and agriculture
                     and in public administration.
                        The impulse for change, however, was also percolating in Britain, a
                     country enmeshed in bourgeois values where, despite greater exploita-
                     tion, some sections of the working classes improved their living stan-
                     dards during the war. The 1919 British official report on labor unrest
                     read: “throughout the war the workers have been led to expect that the
                     conclusion of hostilities would be followed by a profound revolution in
                     the economic structure of society” (“Memorandum on the Causes of
                     and Remedies for Labour Unrest,” February 27, 1919; reprinted in Cole
                     1920a, 247).
                        In Britain there was growing consensus that the old order should not
                     return, or at least that it should not continue unchanged. Such wide-
                     spread conviction was as much a reaction to the classist nature of eco-


                                                                                                       49




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   49        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     nomic intervention as it was the outcome of workers’ newly acquired
                     power. In fact, interventionist British policies during the war had re-
                     quired constant mediation with the representatives of labor in order
                     to secure their collaboration. In this manner, the state acknowledged
                     the newly empowered union bodies that were elevated “to a new sort
                     of status: from interest groups they became ‘governing institutions’”
                     (Middlemas 1979, 20). In Britain, during the war, labor representatives
                     not only constantly participated in governmental committees; they also
                     participated as ministers and officials in the state apparatus itself.
                        In Italy, industrial mobilization had not been the product of an
                     agreement with unions—their voices were muffled compared to those
                     of their British counterparts. However, FIOM did partake in certain
                     state commissions, and for the first time the union directly confronted
                     industrialists on the general productive strategies of the country. Thus,
                     war collectivism marked the beginning of Italian collective bargaining
                     at a national level (Bezza 1982, 99) and the beginning of a climate of in-
                     dustrial relations in which workers believed they could demand more.
                        This pressure for change was ever more pronounced from below. In
                     fact, war collectivism prompted a great divide within the labor move-
                     ment that would characterize the immediate postwar years: a moder-
                     ate political project within bourgeois institutions versus a call for a
                     fundamental break with the past through economic democracy. The
                     Clydeside region in Britain and the city of Turin in Italy are both em-
                     blematic of this politicization process: the working rank and file in both
                     places viewed their union leadership with hostility, believing leaders
                     were collaborating with the “servile state.” The two regions were the
                     beating hearts of their respective countries’ metallurgical industries
                     and, importantly, the identities of each nation’s working-class pro-
                     test: illegitimate strikes spread like wildfire, especially after 1917 and
                     the galvanizing effect of the Russian Revolution. Both governments
                     brutally repressed strikes and sentenced radical leaders to jail. The re-
                     pression, however, had only a temporary deterrent effect. British shop
                     stewards formed a powerful Clyde Workers Committee, which led the
                     formation of a National Workers Committee Movement, linking up
                     unofficial leaders in factories throughout the country. Meanwhile, self-


                     50




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   50        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                   the great war and the economy


                     governance in the Italian Factory Committees grew to the point of pre-
                     cipitating a movement of factory occupations in the summer of 1920.

                     Conclusion

                     During World War I, the political states of both Britain and Italy broke
                     capitalist dogma and forcefully intervened in their countries’ econo-
                     mies. For the political survival of each state, these interventions were
                     necessary: they sought to promote the necessary capital accumulation
                     to win the war, even while they sullied the sanctity of free-market capi-
                     talism in the process. This chapter studied the unfolding of this process,
                     its reasons and its modalities, to set the scene for an exploration of the
                     radical political consequences that followed.
                         Governments became their countries’ main producers, both through
                     the seizure of the means of production and the management of private
                     industries—fixing output and prices while advancing capital and fos-
                     tering technological innovation. The British and Italian governments
                     dictated the crops that were to be grown, managed uncultivated land,
                     fixed consumption prices, and determined distribution. They also
                     entered the domestic and international markets as the main buyer of
                     foodstuffs, raw materials, and commodities. These governments gained
                     vast power to requisition land and goods while also setting limits on
                     private profits. In other words, social production became political. The
                     same was true of the labor market: to cope with a dwindling pool of
                     labor, both governments intervened to discipline workers and control
                     the supply of labor while also setting its price.
                         Most importantly, the British and Italian states’ command over the
                     two pillars of capitalist accumulation—private ownership of the means
                     of production and wage relations—had the fundamental effect of po-
                     liticizing their economies. Indeed, it exposed how relations of produc-
                     tion could be a terrain of political contestation, thus prone to social
                     change. The British and Italian workers were in the best position to
                     grasp the full meaning of such an unprecedented turn of events. Their
                     governments had tightened the exploitative grip on the workers; but
                     unlike the grip of the invisible hand, the state’s chokehold was visible


                                                                                                       51




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   51        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     and could thus be subverted. The workers—whose unions’ contractual
                     power had increased during the war—could now land heavy blows by
                     demanding more social rights and different organizations of produc-
                     tion. As we shall explore in chapter 2, immediately after the war the
                     Italian and British governments were responsive to popular pressure—
                     and even ready to enact substantive welfare measures in an attempt to
                     appease popular demands for change.




                     52




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   52        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 2

                     “A Wholly New School
                     of Thought”




                            A crisis so tremendous as this drives even the least reflective mind to
                            question those conventions, to penetrate beneath that surface where his
                            questioning used to stop dead, to ask what purpose is served by this or that
                            institution, this or that kind of life? . . . The mind soon ceases to be distressed
                            by anything that seems inevitable, especially if the body that actually suffers
                            belongs to someone else. Hence it needs a great shock to awaken a society to
                            some fundamental change of outlook. Such a shock has come to England and
                            to the world, and the defeat of Germany is not more important for mankind
                            than the nature and the scale of the change of spirit that will result from it.

                            Jason [pseud.], Past and Future (1918, 3–4)


                     The significance of capitalist nations suspending their capitalist prac-
                     tices was not lost on the nations’ people. Many, like the British journal-
                     ist J. H. Hammond (who used the pseudonym Jason), observed these
                     events as a fundamental crisis of society as it stood: “[the war] has
                     shaken some millions of men out of the state of mind in which they ac-
                     cept the world as they find it” (Jason [pseud.] 1918, 9). These societies,
                     awakened by war, questioned the purpose of the institutions of capital
                     accumulation. Were they really as inevitable as they had seemed?
                         By 1919, a year after the war’s end, a crisis of capitalism was under-
                     way. It proceeded on two fronts. The first was with workers, who fo-
                     cused on derailing or at least disfiguring capitalist social relations of
                     production. The second was “reconstructionists”—people within state



                                                                                                                  53




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   53        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                      6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     institutions or enlightened elite that agitated for a new set of social poli-
                     cies, and with these policies, for a more egalitarian society.
                         By the time the armistice came into force in November 1918, these
                     two groups were already moving in complement with one another.
                     On one side, the working rank and file were galvanized by their hope
                     for social reforms. State interventions to better these workers’ mate-
                     rial conditions had spurred the workers’ sense of their rights, but also
                     deeply frustrated them—the reforms that passed never seemed to
                     match their emancipatory expectations. Reformists, meanwhile, were
                     growing in number and in ambition—they felt pressure from below
                     and were preoccupied with staving off a revolution. The more the work-
                     ers demanded, the more the reconstructionists were ready to push for a
                     new social order. In turn, these greater social reforms heightened work-
                     ers’ aspirations to break from the system.
                         The “reconstructionist” forces within government posed a frontal
                     assault on capital accumulation in two main ways. The first, which
                     will be explored in chapter 3, is how the reconstructionist motivation
                     for social appeasement often, perhaps unavoidably, fueled the work-
                     ers’ revolutionary spirits. The second, and the focus of this chapter, is
                     how the reconstructionists themselves actually challenged the purity of
                     laissez-faire capitalism—and with it, the established identity of capital-
                     ist states. The unparalleled bluster of social reforms between 1918 and
                     1920—those called for and those enacted—reflect the existential nature
                     of this threat for capitalism. These social policies were the outcomes of
                     the postwar re-politicization of private property and wage relations—
                     the two pillars that during the war had been decoupled from market
                     forces. The glass had already been broken; the previously untouchable
                     economic institutions could now be molded toward unimaginable po-
                     litical ends.
                         The Great War had demonstrated the immense fiscal, monetary, and
                     industrial powers of the state, and accordingly how major redistribu-
                     tive reforms were concrete and viable—much more than conventional
                     economic thinking had allowed.




                     54




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   54        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”




                     Beyond “the Tyranny of Economic Creed”

                     The British civil servant Alfred D. Hall, describing the newfound re-
                     constructionist spirit that had seized so many within the British and
                     Italian establishments, characterized the moment as an enlightenment:

                        Few can fail to feel the force of inspiration and experience which is be-
                        ing born of the war, or to recognize the strength of the new hope with
                        which the people are looking forward to the future. The nation [Britain]
                        ardently desires to order its life in accordance with those principles of
                        freedom and justice. . . . For no one can doubt that we are at a turning
                        point in our national history. A new era has come upon us. We cannot
                        stand still. We cannot return to the old ways, the old abuses, the old
                        stupidities . . . the public not only has its conscience aroused and its heart
                        stirred, but also has its mind open and receptive of new ideas to an un-
                        precedented degree.


                     This turning point was about ideas as much as practices—and how the
                     two were ultimately inseparable when it came to change in society. A
                     pamphlet written by two bureaucrats of the Italian Ministry of Military
                     Assistance and War Pensions, Leo Pavoni and Diego Avarelli, echoed
                     this same belief: “The war has been a war of ideas. Out of its miseries
                     and catastrophes a luminous path has been traced for the ends of the
                     State . . . [the war] has laid the foundations of the distinguished edifice
                     of human solidarity” (Ministero per l’Assistenza Militare e le Pensioni
                     di Guerra 1919, vi–vii).
                        The pamphlet continued by stressing a historical aufhebung: “The
                     state of law that was considered the most elevated form of state before
                     the war . . . has suddenly been overtaken and surpassed by the highest
                     of conceptions: the state of law and social welfare” (ibid., 26). Doctor
                     Michele Pietravalle, vice president of the Italian House, enthused: “the
                     undelayable duty of the State” [improrogabile dovere dello stato] to safe-
                     guard citizens’ rights, especially those of the “underprivileged classes”
                     [classi diseredate], was now “a categorical imperative” [imperativo


                                                                                                         55




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   55        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     Table .. Percentage of the active population of Italy and the UK covered by
                     social welfare
                     Country                                                                 
                     Italy                                               .         .             .
                     United Kingdom (Great Britain)                     .        .             .
                     Base =  (the index value is set at  in the year )
                     Source: Alber (, –).



                     categorico] (Pietravalle 1919, 109–11). The law professor Filippo Vassalli
                     went further: “The war has silently enacted a great revolution” embod-
                     ied in the introduction of audacious legal principles that could even be
                     named “state socialism” [socialismo di stato].
                        Indeed, war had meant welfare. In Britain, a minimal system of so-
                     cial guarantees had already been in place in the Victorian period, and
                     the state had expanded social reforms through the early years of the
                     twentieth century (see Peden 1985, 16–35). However, the degree of state
                     intervention during the war was unprecedented. By 1918 local and na-
                     tional government expenditures on social services, expressed as a share
                     of gross national product, had doubled (to around 8 percent—see Peden
                     1985, 57). The Italian case was even more impressive, since public welfare
                     had barely existed prior to the war. By 1920 the country had performed
                     the greatest leap in the extension of social welfare coverage of any Euro-
                     pean nation—increasing almost sixfold since 1915 (see table 2.1).
                        Reconstructionists aimed to concretize the social progress made
                     during the war effort, which in their view represented a great stride
                     toward a better society based on notions of social justice and redistri-
                     bution. “There are all the indications of a wholly new school of thought
                     which is laying hold of people,” commented the former lord chancel-
                     lor, Viscount Richard Haldane, a month after the armistice. This new
                     school of thought reverberated among the leaders of government.
                        On November 23, 1918, British prime minister Lloyd George spoke
                     to a crowd in Wolverhampton, and his tone was one of reconciliation
                     leaning toward revolutionary: “What is our task? To make Britain a fit
                     country for heroes to live in . . . [we] will lift those who have been living
                     in the dark places to a plateau where they will get the rays of the sun.”


                     56




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   56        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     These dark places included millions who were living under atrocious
                     social conditions—“We mean to put these things right.”
                         Just as the British prime minister was certain that in this “new
                     world” the workers “must be inexorable in their demands” (Tasca 1965,
                     18), so too on November 20, 1918, Italian prime minister Vittorio Or-
                     lando proclaimed that the war was “the greatest political-social revo-
                     lution recorded by history” (ibid.). That same day, Antonio Salandra,
                     Orlando’s predecessor, reiterated, “The War is a revolution. . . . It is the
                     hour of the youth. Let no one think that a peaceful return to the past
                     will be possible after the storm” (ibid.).
                         The enlightened reconstructionist elite came from different profes-
                     sions (intellectuals, pastors, educators, professors) and governmental
                     posts as well as from a variety of political backgrounds—from progres-
                     sive liberalism to reformist socialism (Italy) or Labour (in Britain). Such a
                     broad constituency was certainly not homogeneous, nor did its adherents
                     aim to dismantle the hierarchical social order. They did, however, share a
                     revulsion to competitive individualism and laissez-faire capitalism. The
                     reconstructionists thus profoundly disputed the economic doctrine that
                     for centuries had stood as the cornerstone of capital accumulation.
                         For Pietravalle, the member of the Italian House, the time had come
                     to revise “material and moral values, and even to rethink, shake, break,
                     knock down constitutions and institutions that once appeared as fun-
                     damental and sacred” (Pietravalle 1919, 103–6). The war experience,
                     Hammond confirmed, “had emancipated and widened our imagina-
                     tions” since it “removed the word ‘impossible’ from the language of pol-
                     itics,” and “destroyed the superstition of the iron law which has checked
                     and hampered all our hopes” (Jason [pseud.]1918, 35).
                         New social sensibilities overtook impersonal economic laws as the
                     “universal arbit[ers]” of social relations. It entailed a breaking out of the
                     “tyranny of a particular economic creed”: human life could no longer be
                     “subordinated” to the “imperious demand for the production of wealth.”
                         First, and most critically, emancipation from impersonal economic
                     laws meant that social reforms could no longer be “delayed or refused
                     sanction on the grounds of expense” (Addison 1918, 1). This was clear
                     in the mind of the minister of reconstruction, Christopher Addison,


                                                                                                       57




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   57        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     who in his determination emerged as a sort of living expression of the
                     postwar reformist impulse.
                        The war had revealed to all—workers and bureaucrats alike—that
                     economic priorities were actually political priorities, and thanks to un-
                     orthodox finance, the state could meet political objectives at any finan-
                     cial cost. Indeed, once the gold standard constraint was removed, the
                     possibilities that emerged opened new horizons for social expenditure.
                     Suddenly no expenditure—toward social measures that were within the
                     society’s resource capabilities—seemed beyond financial possibility.
                        In his memorandum on reconstitution finance to the government,
                     Addison was adamant that “[i]t would be no defense to say that vital
                     proposals were not enacted for want of money. Nobody will believe it”
                     (ibid., 5, my italics). Eric Geddes, the minister of transport, also voiced
                     the popular view: “You must be prepared to spend money on after-the-
                     war problems as you did on during-the-war problems. That [money]
                     must be found and added to our debt if necessary.”
                        While economic experts at the British Treasury were taking cover
                     behind the priority of funding debt and curtailing inflation in sup-
                     port of creditor/investors (who were, in their minds, the sole sources
                     of future capital accumulation and prosperity), the reconstructionists
                     argued that such prosperity could actually be found via greater expen-
                     diture and new frontiers of social reform.
                        Practical consensus among reconstructionists was grounded in faith
                     in “human power” to change economic conditions through the inter-
                     dependence between fiscal, monetary, and industrial policy. Progres-
                     sive taxes and state spending had to go hand in hand with favorable
                     credit policy and especially with industrial harmony achieved through
                     forms of workers’ industrial control or of industrial cooperation. This
                     “progressive trinity” of fiscal, monetary, and industrial policies would
                     secure efficiency, high employment, and social justice.

                     Social Welfare for Social Peace

                     The postwar impulse to break away from economic orthodoxy was not,
                     of course, spontaneous. Some of these sentiments had been percolat-


                     58




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   58        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     ing before the war began, and they were to a large extent a pragmatic
                     response to social upheavals. Much of this pressure originated in orga-
                     nized labor.
                         For decades British and Italian unions and their working-class polit-
                     ical parties had mobilized for social welfare. During the war their de-
                     mands became louder, reflecting a mounting distrust of governments
                     and their classist policies. To promote national ideological cohesion,
                     wartime states were thus pressured to experiment with various forms
                     of welfare as a form of olive branch. As the economist Arrigo Serpieri
                     put it, the objective of social legislation was “winning the favor and qui-
                     etude of the working masses,” both in industry and in the countryside
                     (Serpieri 1930, 343).
                         In Italy, it was only after the country’s defeat in the Battle of Caporetto
                     in November 1917—a massive loss of life that hollowed the spirit of the
                     Italian people—that the state took on a central role as a social actor.
                     It established the Ministry of Military Assistance and War Pensions,
                     which would benefit citizens generally, and not just soldiers.
                         The very fact that Italian social reforms were introduced by de-
                     cree—an executive urgency procedure to overcome lengthy parliamen-
                     tary debates—expressed the necessity of quick intervention for the sake
                     of class appeasement and a recognition of popular demands. This re-
                     mained vital even after the armistice, since the meager state-provided
                     war welfare sparked additional discontent, its value regarded as laugh-
                     able in the face of exploitation and inflation.
                         The Italian inflation crisis of the country’s “red years” of 1919 and
                     1920 was marked by protests against the high cost of living and the
                     predatory behaviors of “i pescecani” [literally, “sharks”]—a nickname
                     for profiteers and speculators who embodied the iniquitous effects
                     of inflation. Beginning on June 11, 1919, and continuing for almost a
                     month, hungry and exasperated crowds dashed into stores through-
                     out the country, taking food, clothing, and all manner of merchandise.
                     Looting and chaotic riots began in the town of La Spezia, and then
                     spread everywhere—from the northern towns of Liguria, Piedmont,
                     Lombardy, and Veneto, to the central towns of Tuscany and Romagna,
                     all the way to Rome and Palermo. Journalists depicted vivid scenes of


                                                                                                       59




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   59        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     chaos and desperation with recurring patterns: spontaneous upris-
                     ings against the high cost of living were soon led by socialist organiza-
                     tions (especially camere del lavoro and unions) who often called for
                     social reform, general strikes, and assemblies. The red municipalities
                     of Emilia—the epicenter of the uprisings—became home to assem-
                     blies that sat permanently (Maione 1975, 32). On July 6 the government
                     rushed to pass a decree that authorized prefects and mayors to pass
                     price controls with abatements up to 50 percent. Article 6 of the decree
                     specified: “the just-price is determined on the basis of prices that are
                     fixed locally by public bodies and consumer cooperatives.” Prices were
                     no longer determined by impersonal market forces; they were suddenly
                     an output of democratic decision-making.
                         Many newspapers, even within the mainstream, supported these
                     prezzi politici (political prices). La Tribuna of July 5, 1919, wrote in
                     solidarity: “We don’t feel like condemning these unrests of classes and
                     masses . . . unrests are inevitable, even necessary. The history of politics
                     in any time teaches us that the state institutions have the inclinations of
                     falling asleep comfortably in their bureaucratic routine. . . . To awaken
                     these high sleepers, there is a need for a little noise, and some noise
                     in this sense never hurts” (Vivarelli 1967, 414–15). As the article made
                     clear, pressure from below was an indispensable driver for reform.
                         Meanwhile, The Times and other British bourgeois publications ob-
                     served the Italian scene with worried eyes. On its end, the leftist Daily
                     Herald asked: “Will British workers, following the example of Italy, re-
                     sort to violence in order to defeat the profiteers? Conan Doyle predicts
                     that they will, unless something is done quickly and thoroughly” (“Will
                     It End in Violence?” Daily Herald, July 10, 1919, 1).
                         The Italian workers, even more than their British counterparts, an-
                     nounced their indispensable role in society. Comprehensive social
                     rights were no longer disputable. In the words of Rinaldo Rigola, tex-
                     tile worker and secretary of the Italian union General Confederation of
                     Labour (CGdL), the worker was “the one without whom there would
                     be nothing for nobody” (Rigola 1918, 7).
                         At the Turin congress of October 8, 1918, the Society for Mutual Aid
                     and Cooperatives, in collaboration with the CGdL, spoke more for-


                     60




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   60        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     mally: “The working class does not ask, nor intend to ask, for man-
                     datory social insurance for sickness, disability, and old age as a phil-
                     anthropic solution to the still-unresolved social problems—but as the
                     expression of rights that have long matured though heretofore in vain,
                     in the scathing and glorious field of labor and social production” (“Il
                     congresso regionale piemontese per le assicurazioni sociali,” L’Avanti,
                     October 8, 1918).
                         The writing was on the wall: “the organized working class battles and
                     intends to battle . . . not for fragmentary solutions . . . but for audacious
                     solutions, extended, complete” (ibid.).
                         In a moment of unprecedented social tension, members of the state
                     apparatus had no choice but to be receptive to these demands. In 1917,
                     the economist Francesco Saverio Nitti, in his role as Treasury minister,
                     had to publicly accept that the workers in the “trenches and fields” de-
                     served “full rights of citizenship” and “no one could divert them.” The
                     push gained momentum. Two years later, for example, Leonida Bissolati,
                     upon his departure as head of the Ministry of Military Assistance and
                     War Pensions, wrote in a note to his fellow civil servants, “Your work
                     is far from done. . . . I vow the birth on a solid basis of the Ministry of
                     State Assistance to unify the existing institutions for pension and social
                     welfare. Such an institution would be a high social deed for democracy”
                     (Ministero per l’Assistenza Militare e le Pensioni di Guerra 1919, 31).
                         Even for wealthy and propertied classes, the state responding in a
                     way that avoided the worst possible break from the capitalist order was
                     a clear necessity. In 1920, Vittorio Cottafavi, a wealthy property owner
                     and MP of the Liberal Constitutional group, wrote to Nitti, who had
                     become prime minister, to stress the strategic need to publicize the so-
                     cial role of the state as an anti-revolutionary antidote:

                        To draw near the workers to the state so that they can see in it a friend
                        and a protector . . . in the endeavor of pacification . . . it would be very
                        useful to familiarize the population with the great initiative of state-
                        funded worker pensions, and with all that is currently being done on be-
                        half of the working classes. Dispensing these healthy facts and brotherly
                        propaganda would benefit public order.


                                                                                                       61




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   61        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                        Some Italian workers’ representatives looked up to Britain as an
                     inspiration for their own reformist demands—since, as Rigola put it,
                     it was evident that the British ruling classes “considered state social
                     intervention as a duty” (Rigola 1918, 2). Indeed, similar political dy-
                     namics were at play in Britain—where, as we know, unions in com-
                     bination with the Labour Party were much more influential than the
                     Italian workers’ organizations, even occupying ministerial posts. As we
                     will further explore in the following chapters, unlike their Italian coun-
                     terparts who flirted with revolution, the majority of British workers’
                     leaders were explicitly reconstructionist in spirit—seeking to advance
                     social good, but through governmental channels.
                        Founded in 1917 and active throughout the immediate postwar pe-
                     riod, the British Ministry of Reconstruction was a government entity
                     charged with compensating the country’s working classes for their war
                     sacrifice. Central to this charge were programs for postwar social and
                     economic improvement, including extensive plans for development in
                     education, unemployment relief, and housing.
                        Housing was undeniably “the chief cause of the industrial unrest”:
                     the unsanitary and unhealthy dwellings of the British workers were the
                     most visible and outrageous marks of class difference and injustice. In
                     a moment of global revolutionary fever, it had to be addressed no mat-
                     ter the economic impediments (which, following the financial outlay
                     of the war, would not have been well received as excuses for inaction).
                     In the words of the Labour leader and MP M. J. Davison: “Let me say
                     quite frankly I am not concerned with the financial aspect of this prob-
                     lem. You did not hesitate to call upon the men to preserve this country
                     from invasion. They protected your property and you did not consider
                     for the moment whether it was going to cost a penny rate or a pound
                     rate” (ibid., cc 1749).
                        Since construction of houses more or less stopped during the war,
                     “at the lowest estimate there must have been a deficit of from 300,000
                     to 400,000 working-class houses by the end of 1918” (Monthly Labour
                     Review 1921, 213). The lack of new housing was exacerbated by the lack
                     of upkeep to existing housing, as during the war repairs and efforts
                     to eliminate slums were forgone. Many dwellings were uninhabitable.


                     62




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   62        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     This crisis was magnified by the higher cost of building in the postwar
                     period, which resulted in higher rents and made it impossible for a
                     considerable portion of the population to afford housing (ibid.). The
                     growing strength of the Labour Party meant that the words of Davison
                     pressuring parliament were to be taken seriously:

                        We say that unless such a policy is adopted, unless the people of this
                        country are housed in decency and in comfort, the Labour Party will
                        take all the means at its disposal to endeavour to obtain a reversal of
                        the verdict of the election of last December. If we care to do so, we can
                        do it most effectively by a method which I would be the last man to
                        advocate. . . . That is not said as a threat. (HC Deb 7 April 1919, vol. 114,
                        cc 1748)


                     The Housing and Town Planning Act of April 1919 promised to build
                     500,000 new houses in three years. This reform was “heroic” (Johnson
                     1968, 425) in its break from the past: it was the first official recognition
                     of the political obligation of the state to house its citizens. A plurality of
                     enlightened commissions under the Ministry of Reconstruction gave
                     shape to the legislation and substantiated the widespread realization
                     that private enterprise—responsible for approximately 95 percent of
                     house-building prior to the war—was unable to grapple successfully
                     and speedily with this social crisis.

                     Reformists in Action

                     The Agenda of the Ministry of Reconstruction

                     The parliamentary debate around the housing bill in April 1919 dem-
                     onstrated the determination and influence of the reconstructionists in
                     British government. Liberal MP James Gilbert spoke for all: “It is very
                     necessary that these houses should be built as soon as possible, because
                     not only myself but every Member of this House is pledged to housing
                     up to the hilt . . . this will mark a new era for the working classes of this
                     country” (James Gilbert, HC Deb 7 April 1919, vol. 114, cc 1763).


                                                                                                        63




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   63        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                         The flames of a workers’ revolution were doused with promises of
                     “proper bathrooms, with a proper service of hot and cold water” (ibid.,
                     cc 1762). These new housing standards had been studied in scientific
                     detail by the Tudor-Walters Committee under the Ministry of Recon-
                     struction. The Committee was named after its chairman, a prominent
                     architect and Liberal MP who collaborated with other renowned ar-
                     chitects such as Frank Baines and Raymond Unwin. The most impres-
                     sive recommendations, however, came from the “Women’s Housing
                     Sub-Committee” (also under the Ministry of Reconstruction). The all-
                     women’s committee, chaired by suffragette and feminist activist Mary
                     Gertrude Emmott, took a very bottom-up approach. As the committee
                     put it, its final report “embod[ied] only such improvements as are de-
                     manded by working women themselves” (Ministry of Reconstruction
                     Advisory Council 1919, 20).
                         The women’s committee’s impressive scheme encompassed rules on
                     windows, ventilation, and “labor-saving devices” for the housewife,
                     such as the American “kitchen cabinet” that would save “unnecessary
                     walking to and fro” (ibid., 9). Most importantly, the committee ex-
                     perimented with “wide possibilities of communal life”—gardens, play-
                     grounds, social centers—since its members believed that “full attention
                     should be given to the organisation of the resources available for social
                     and intellectual development” (ibid., 20). The committee stressed the
                     material conditions for women’s emancipation. A section of the report
                     titled “Communal Holiday Homes” confronted “the difficulty experi-
                     enced by working women in obtaining a real rest and holiday.” The plan
                     envisaged “(1) Houses in which mothers could, without anxiety, leave
                     their young children . . . (2) Large houses in seaside or country places
                     to which groups of working people might go for a holiday” (ibid., 13).
                         The Women’s Cooperative Guild led another sweeping campaign
                     to recognize and compensate a woman’s unpaid labor of child bearing
                     and rearing. In the words of the suffragette public intellectual Maude
                     Royden: “motherhood is a service which entitles a woman to economic
                     independence” (Pedersen 1993, 146). The Family Endowment Commit-
                     tee asked the government to fund all mothers from pregnancy until the



                     64




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   64        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     child reached the age of five. Even The Times published supportive ac-
                     counts for this demanding budgetary measure (“Saving the Children,”
                     The Times, February 25, 1919, 7). Unfortunately, with the resurgence of
                     austerity in the 1920s, this agenda never saw the light of day.
                         In those early postwar years, all of these committees gave voice to
                     a larger working-class constituency that aimed to develop the founda-
                     tions for a revolution in social life based on “co-operative buying and
                     selling” and especially “the spread of communal living” (Ministry of
                     Reconstruction Advisory Council 1919, 14).
                         Within the state apparatus the enlightened bourgeoisie and the
                     representatives of labor joined hands to deliver on the promise of a
                     new and more just society through unprecedented social reforms—
                     “intimately and immediately connected to one another” (Ernest
                     Pretyman, HC Deb 7 April 1919, vol. 114, cc 1773).
                         The Adult Education Committee was active for more than two years.
                     Prominent reconstructionists including the politician Ernest Bevin, the
                     unionist Frank Hodges, and the economist R. H. Tawney, under the
                     chairmanship of the Oxford Don A. L. Smith, joined forces to produce
                     a visionary final report in October 1919.
                         Galvanized by the August 1918 Education Act—which abolished all
                     fees in public elementary schools, raised the ending age for compulsory
                     education from 12 to 14, and required local authorities to provide for
                     part-time continuation schools for 14-to-16-year-olds—the Commit-
                     tee called for a profound democratization of economic and political
                     decisions.
                         Its members honored the newly acknowledged centrality of labor
                     with a groundbreaking commitment written in capital letters that is
                     still an unmet ideal today: “adult education is a permanent
                     national necessity, an inseparable aspect of citizenship,
                     and therefore should be both universal and lifelong.”
                         A “systematic,” “continuous,” and “social” education, as the “duty
                     of the community,” would satisfy workers’ widespread “appetite for
                     knowledge” and overcome “work without thought” (Ministry of Re-
                     construction 1919b, 36–37). This non-vocational type of adult education



                                                                                                       65




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   65        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     was the opposite of a top-down process or of an indoctrinating exercise
                     on the part of the state. Rather, it was a timely response to a mounting
                     popular educational movement.
                         Indeed, the Committee envisioned a “considerable increase in finan-
                     cial contributions from the State” (ibid., 117) to assist all forms of “vol-
                     untary organizations,” such as the Workers’ Educational Association.
                     That association provided a “network” of classes and reading circles
                     over many districts, uniting “some 2,555 societies, including 952 Trade
                     Unions, Trades Councils and branches, 388 Co-operative Societies, and
                     other organisations in a popular educational movement” (ibid., 38–39).
                     Other hubs that built workers’ consciousness through a variety of criti-
                     cal courses, including those on the history and economics of capitalism
                     and socialist theory, were to be the beneficiaries of state grants. The
                     likes of London’s Working Man College, Ruskin College, and Labour
                     College expressed “the belief of organized labour in the importance of
                     bringing higher education within reach of the younger generation of
                     trade unionists” (ibid., 39).
                         The insight on the theory-practice connection—between “knowl-
                     edge and effective action”—was spreading: “It is significant, indeed, of
                     the growing belief in the value of study that movements and organiza-
                     tions whose main purpose is a practical one have come more and more
                     in recent years to encourage it among their members by organizing
                     lectures, classes and reading circles or by supplying them with books”
                     (ibid., 39–40). L’Ordine nuovo movement in Italy of those years would
                     develop these thoughts to their full revolutionary consequences (as we
                     shall see in chapter 4).
                         The Adult Education Committee envisioned the spread of critical
                     economic knowledge to the rural areas. It remarked: “it is certain that
                     with the growth of trade unionism amongst agricultural workers, there
                     will be a demand for economic history and economics from the point of
                     view of the workers’ experience and interests” (ibid., 146). This vision of
                     cultural empowerment gave rise to ambitious schemes of public trans-
                     port and urban planning, for example to build a Village Institute—“a
                     living nucleus of communal activity” that included “a hall large enough



                     66




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   66        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     for dances, cinema shows, concerts, plays, public lectures, and exhibi-
                     tions,” as well as “a public library and local museum” (ibid., 142–43).

                     The Reach of Reconstruction

                     The year 1919 was a year of nationalization projects that favored the work-
                     ing classes of Britain. This included not only the coal sector (as we will
                     see in the next chapter), but also the transportation and health sectors.
                        The Ministry of Transport was conceived as a body with the power
                     to nationalize any transport undertaking (roads, railways, canals, and
                     docks) and to control the supply of electricity. These nationalization
                     schemes, especially for railways, caused uproar within the conservative
                     establishment, with the chairman of the Council of the Chamber of
                     Commerce describing the bill as a “revolution by Act of Parliament”
                     (“Ways and Means Communication,” The Times, March 4, 1919, 12).
                     Yet even The Times endorsed its progressive appeal, understanding the
                     government’s “transport revolution” as “one of their most important
                     weapons in the new war which is just beginning against obsolete and
                     inefficient industrial and social conditions” (“Commons and Transport
                     Bill,” The Times, March 6, 1919, 6).
                        Similarly, the Ministry of Health was created in 1919 to centralize
                     health governance and “ultimately abolish the Poor Law” (Charles
                     Sitch, HC Deb 26 February 1919, vol. 112, cc 1878). MPs spoke of “the
                     nationalisation” of “the very greatest asset which any nation or any in-
                     dividual may possess, namely, the nationalisation of the health of the
                     people of this country” (ibid., Major Alexander Farquharson, cc 1878).
                        Elected officials hailed the health bill as “a splendid thing” (ibid.,
                     Captain Walter Elliot, cc 1891). It gained “unanimous support from
                     all quarters of the House” (ibid., Major Waldorf Astor, cc 1909).
                     MPs spoke about a society where the “rigid distinction between the
                     words ‘prevention’ and ‘cure’” was surpassed (ibid., Major Alexander
                     Farquharson, cc 1880). If criticisms were raised, they were in the direc-
                     tion of asking for more. Many in the House stood in favor of reinforc-
                     ing the power of action of the Ministry—especially concerning mental



                                                                                                       67




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   67        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     health and funds for medical research. Unfortunately, as we will see in
                     the second part of the book, universal national health care was doomed
                     to be a victim of postwar austerity.
                         Italian reconstructionists within government had similar ambitions
                     for a national health service. One commission, the Abbiate Commis-
                     sion, proposed a universalist welfare reform—“insurance is to be ex-
                     tended to all citizens”—that took much from the demands of the popu-
                     lar Italian union CGdL and the Socialist Party. As in the case of Britain,
                     the project was to centralize and simplify social provision under a single
                     insurance: covering healthcare against illness, accident protection, and
                     maternity coverage. Pietravalle and his colleagues on the Commission
                     were directly inspired by the British reforms when they campaigned
                     for a Ministry of Health that would guide “under one directive mind”
                     (Pietravalle 1919, 108) the extensive “newborn, more promising and
                     higher tasks” of public health (ibid., 110). The leaders of CGdL pushed
                     for an even more comprehensive and “less rigid plan,” one that would
                     include more categories of workers at lower ages, and guarantee higher
                     subsidies, especially for the workers with lower wages (Rigola 1918, 4).
                         Emancipatory projects regarding healthcare were put on the back
                     burner by the Liberal postwar governments and later drowned by the
                     Fascist austerity campaign. After this setback, the universal national
                     health system would not become a reality in Italy until 1978. And in the
                     early 1990s, the resurgence of austerity again began chipping away at
                     these government programs.
                         In 1919, though, the high season of social reform was in full throt-
                     tle—to the point that, by that December, the Liberal Democrat Ma-
                     rio Cermenati, undersecretary of the Ministry of Military Assistance,
                     could commend his country for rising “from last place” to occupy “the
                     vanguard for social insurance,” and for its “will to do even more.” To
                     substantiate Cermenati’s optimism, it is enough to mention the three
                     most important reformist victories.
                         In April 1919, the state declared insurance against disability and old
                     age mandatory and extended it to cover all private sector workers.
                     It inaugurated an early form of a cross-class redistributive system that




                     68




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   68        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     benefited some 12 million workers, including tenant farmers, mezzadri
                     (sharecroppers), white-collar workers, and shopkeepers with low in-
                     comes (Pavan 2019, 851). Augusto Ciuffelli, the minister of agriculture,
                     industry, and commerce, presented the provision to Parliament invok-
                     ing Italy’s “awareness of her duties to her people” and the legislation’s
                     “great task of peace and social justice” (ibid., 850).
                         The wave of reform continued with the effective institution in 1919
                     of mandatory insurance against accidents for agricultural workers
                     (originally introduced in Regent’s Law Decree 1450, August 23, 1917,
                     in GU, 1917 General Index of Subjects, 47). This law, strongly favored
                     by Socialist trade unions, overwhelmed the opposition of landowners
                     and the Chamber of Commerce, who worried that state intervention—
                     especially centralized public management of accident insurance
                     through the newly instituted Cassa Nazionale Infortuni (CNI)—would
                     irrevocably alter class hierarchies. A January 1918 Chamber of Com-
                     merce manifesto opposed the law and warned: “the decree would have
                     a major impact on relations between workers and owners, both politi-
                     cally and owing to its financial repercussions.”
                         For the first time, this law made insurance for accidents in agricul-
                     ture public and mandatory, applying the modern principle of an auto-
                     matic right to compensation that was not linked to the contribution of
                     the employer. With this reform, 9 million farm workers gained social
                     protection, joining the industrial workers. In a 1921 decree, Prime Min-
                     ister Giolitti would further extend the law’s scope by lowering the bar-
                     rier to eligibility. Mussolini’s austerity axe of 1923, however, made sure
                     to immediately gut Giolitti’s decree (Royal Decree Law 432, February 11,
                     1923, in GU 64 [March 17, 1923], 2286).
                         Finally, Italy had become a front runner in its unemployment re-
                     form, another means to quell high working-class demands. Apart from
                     the Soviet laws of 1917, the Italian scheme was the first one to introduce
                     a large-scale system of obligatory unemployment insurance (covering
                     industrial and agricultural workers and white-collar employees of both
                     sexes, aged fifteen to sixty-five). This 1919 scheme was even more in-
                     clusive than its British counterpart of 1920.




                                                                                                       69




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   69        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis




                     Reformism: Pacification or Polarization?

                     The postwar creation of the Italian Ministry of Labour and Social Wel-
                     fare, which closely resembled the British Ministry of Labour (estab-
                     lished in 1916), reveals the double-edged significance of the reconstruc-
                     tionist project. On the one hand, the explicit objective of the Nitti
                     government was to strengthen state intervention for the protection of
                     the working classes. On the other, this reform constituted an attempt
                     to harmonize productive relations and thus guarantee the survival of a
                     fragile capitalist system.
                        Since the beginning of the century, the Socialist party, the CGdL, and
                     the national leagues of cooperatives had been calling for a ministry “to
                     deal with the problems of labor” [che provveda ai problemi del lavoro].
                     The prewar Liberal governments avoided this project—there was over-
                     whelming opposition to a ministry understood as “a class ministry” [un
                     ministero di classe]. After the war, however, things were different. The
                     war dynamics ushered in new priorities, and no imperative was stron-
                     ger than assimilating the working classes and defusing their rejection of
                     the capitalist state. The government sought social peace through social
                     and labor reform. Indeed, the collaborative relation between labor and
                     the state was a pillar of Nitti’s “productivist reformism”—a creed that
                     largely overlapped with that of many British reconstructionists. The
                     reader may thus discern the fundamental ambivalence of reconstruc-
                     tionism: even in its construction of safety nets, the welfare state still
                     performs a function of social control. Workers have less incentive to
                     break from a system that provides them with greater labor rights and
                     social benefits.
                        Notably, even in such an explosive social moment, most social re-
                     forms were not actually so reformist in their results. Rather than ap-
                     peasing workers, the “enlightened agenda” stimulated higher expec-
                     tations for a better future. Cracks between reformers and radicals
                     emerged.
                        For example, while the CGdL campaigned for insurance against
                     disability and old age, the rank and file began mobilizing against the


                     70




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   70        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     payment of insurance quotas. In the summer of 1920 workers at the
                     Bianchi workshop in Milan organized a strike that was supported by
                     the Chamber of Labour of Bologna and Turin: “What purpose do these
                     social insurances have when we are on the verge of revolution? Why
                     pay if we will soon have all the power?” (Tasca 1920, 124). These cracks
                     became fault lines, and in 1920 an ascendent Benito Mussolini wrote in
                     an article for Il popolo d’Italia that it was not only the Liberal state that
                     was in grave crisis, but the reformist attitude of the unions themselves.
                         The reformist governments’ lack of toehold was painfully clear to
                     the governments themselves. In January 1921, an Italian parliamentary
                     commission made plain that in the new Ministry of Labour “the work-
                     ers see by now the supreme organ of protection of their interests and
                     from it they expect further reforms directed to the material and moral
                     elevation of the worker.”
                         The Italian reconstructionist project’s desperation for social peace
                     failed, ultimately ushering in the 1922 Fascist regime. As we shall ex-
                     plore, Fascist austerity abruptly broke the season of reforms and inau-
                     gurated a return of the most uncompromising ruling classes. Emblem-
                     atic of this newly found strategy of “appeasement” was the dismantling
                     of the Ministry of Labour in 1923.
                         Rather than advancing national unity, reconstructionism had po-
                     larized society. On the one side stood workers and their revolution-
                     ary practices, whose vilification by the state would later give rise to
                     austerity policies. On the other side was the reactionary bourgeoisie,
                     supported by influential economists—the protagonists of the second
                     part of the book—who initiated a powerful campaign against the “pa-
                     ternalistic bureaucratic” state and unleashed the weapon of austerity.
                     Austerity operated as a defense mechanism not only against revolu-
                     tionary upsurges but also against the very principles of postwar welfare
                     capitalism and its potential expansion.
                         Certainly Britain represented a less explosive scenario, but this was
                     only a difference in degree, not in kind. Even if it is true that in a mature
                     capitalist economy the workers’ representatives were more profoundly
                     integrated into the state apparatus, social polarization was still an in-
                     sidious reality. The struggles of the miners we will explore in chapter 3


                                                                                                       71




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   71        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     are indicative of how social reforms amplified demands to take over
                     production. As Lord Sankey noted in the official 1919 coal commission
                     report, there was in the coalfields much more than “a desire for the
                     material advantages of higher wages and shorter hours.” Workers ex-
                     pressed “to an ever-increasing extent, a higher ambition of taking their
                     due share and interest in the direction of the industry to the success of
                     which they, too, are contributing” (Great Britain, Royal Commission
                     on Coal Industry 1919b, vii). To halt the threats to the old order, a vo-
                     cal “anti-waste” campaign against public expenditure burst through the
                     seams and found strong institutional support in the austerity crusade
                     of the experts at the British Treasury.

                     Conclusion

                     During the Great War, the British and Italian governments employed
                     social welfare as a powerful strategy of political cohesion on an un-
                     precedented scale. In a moment when laissez-faire capitalism was re-
                     vealing its classist bias, the states intervened as redistributive actors
                     to stave off the system’s internal combustion. In the war’s immediate
                     aftermath, the reconstructionists propelled this strategy further: equi-
                     table reform could moderate popular discontent and placate workers,
                     who would now have something to lose from breaking away from the
                     bourgeois socioeconomic order. Appeasing the collective involved an
                     ambitious reconstruction of society on a socially inclusive basis, no-
                     where better expressed than in the British Ministry of Reconstruction
                     and its numerous enlightened committees or in the Italian Ministry of
                     Labour and Social Welfare—the symbols of workers’ voice within the
                     state apparatus.
                        There is no doubt that at its root the impulse toward reconstruc-
                     tion was a matter of existential preservation: reforms were the antidote
                     to any immediate deracination of the bourgeois social contract. Para-
                     doxically, however, what was required for its preservation was in itself
                     a threat to capitalism, or at least a grave threat to “pure” laissez-faire
                     capitalism.
                        Indeed, with postwar reconstruction, the priorities of the economic


                     72




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   72        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                               “a wholly new school of thought”


                     system dramatically shifted: from satisfying the individual profit mo-
                     tive to satisfying the collective social need. Resources were transferred
                     away from private capital to the collective. This meant, for example,
                     that tax revenues and newly created credits were used for programs of
                     public health and education instead of being channeled back into the
                     pockets of savers-investors.
                        After the war, many rejected the “old economic creed” in favor of
                     “a progressive trinity”—expansionist fiscal and monetary policies and
                     inclusive industrial agendas that outmuscled the impersonal laws of
                     the market. In affirming human agency, reconstructionists refused
                     to bow to budgetary constraints as an “economic limit” to policies of
                     social distribution. These plans for a “new society” reached for high
                     emancipatory goals—from the spread of communal living that empow-
                     ered women to the funding of workers’ schools that taught about labor
                     rights and socialist theory.
                        Ultimately, economic orthodoxy had to contend with two sets of
                     enemies. First was the reconstructionists, who—through their vision
                     of increasing social redistribution to the detriment of private capital—
                     represented an important enemy of capitalism in its pure laissez-faire
                     form. But an arguably greater enemy emerged at the same time, one
                     that challenged the very foundations of capitalism and was emboldened
                     by reconstructionist reforms: people’s revolutionary ambitions. Rather
                     than being appeased by social redistribution, workers were galvanized
                     by it. The years 1919–1920 were marked by vast mobilizations toward
                     an alternative socioeconomic system which entailed the overcoming of
                     private ownership of the means of production and wages themselves.
                        The mutually enhancing relation between reforms and working-
                     class consciousness proved to be an explosive synergy. Ironically, the
                     reformists, who had bent the iron laws of the market to avoid a revolu-
                     tion, had actually contributed to sparking another one. These radical
                     embers that charred capitalism are the subject of chapter 3.




                                                                                                       73




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   73        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 3

                     The Struggle for
                     Economic Democracy




                            Economic movements have a rapidly growing tendency to become also
                            political, not only because the workers possess a greatly increased power
                            and are far more conscious of it, but also because their economic claims are
                            animated by a steadily deepening hostility to the whole capitalist order of
                            society. Not only do the workers feel stronger, they have also a growing feel-
                            ing that capitalism is insecure.

                            G. D. H. Cole, Chaos and Order in Industry (1920a, 8–9)



                     Capitalism’s crisis of legitimacy was born from its undressing during
                     World War I: state interventions in national economies expanded the
                     limits of what was possible, politically, and in doing so opened up spaces
                     for greater political imagination around the organization of socioeco-
                     nomic relations. Put simply, the very conditions created by state control
                     during the war caused the breakdown of the commonsense rational-
                     ity that had justified the system up to that point. Chapter 2 detailed
                     how such a breakdown was manifested in the postwar reconstruction-
                     ist spirit and its attempts at appeasement via social reforms. Now we
                     examine how the loss of legitimacy for capitalist governments went
                     much deeper: it opened the question of the profit motive—the core of
                     capitalism—as well as its two fundamental pillars, private ownership of
                     the means of production and wage relations.
                         Following the war, pockets of workers from across Europe were
                     drawn to modes of organization in which production was intended for


                     74




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   74        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     use rather than profit; communal property was favored over private
                     property; freedom was valued above the commodification of labor. The
                     strength and revolutionary significance of the Italian and especially
                     British labor movements after the war have been downplayed by many
                     labor historians in the decades that followed; G. D. H. Cole, the politi-
                     cal theorist and economist who wrote this chapter’s epigraph, wrote in
                     his 1958 A History of Socialist Thought, Vol. 4, “I have tried to make
                     plain that there was no point at all at which there was any possibility of
                     a British Revolution” (Cole 1958, 449). This was a departure from his
                     dispatches from the period itself, including a 1919 testimony that read
                     in part, “[f]or I do sincerely believe that the present economic order is
                     breaking down, and that its definite collapse is a matter not of decades,
                     but of years” (Cole 1920a, 24). He observed that what had held capital-
                     ism together until that point, that is, “the widespread conviction that
                     capitalism was inevitable” (ibid., 8), was collapsing.
                         Indeed, during the red years of 1919–1920, collective imagination
                     was fired by events happening elsewhere in Europe. The writings of the
                     reformist-socialist Pietro Nenni reveal the interconnected and trans-
                     national nature of the crisis: “The fall of the Hohenzollern in Germany,
                     the dissolution of the Habsburg empire and the flight of its last em-
                     peror, the Spartacist movements in Berlin, the Bolshevik revolution in
                     Hungary, the Soviet in Bavaria . . . fired the imaginations and inspired
                     the hope that the old world was on the point of crumbling and that
                     humanity was on the verge of a new era of a new social order” (Nenni
                     1946, 6).
                         If one is to argue that capitalism was crumbling during this pe-
                     riod—as I do—then the unparalleled surges of industrial action in
                     Britain and Italy are exhibits A and B. These postwar industrial actions
                     sought new relations of production to construct democratic societies.
                         Labor movements were grounded in demands for workers’ control,
                     i.e., the substitution of a new industrial order that replaced the capi-
                     talist industrial system, partially if not completely. Cole, in his earlier
                     voice, explains: “But, when Labour asks for control, it is not with profits
                     or profit-sharing that it is primarily concerned, but with the democ-
                     ratisation of the actual management of industry, and the securing for


                                                                                                       75




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   75        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     the organised workers of a real measure of control over the conditions
                     under which they work. Labour’s remedy for the curse of profiteering
                     is not a share in profits for itself, but the public ownership of industry
                     combined with a system of democratic control” (Cole 1920b, Preface,
                     vx). A campaign as radical as one for workers’ control required the de-
                     ployment of multiple strategies. This chapter details three: the struggles
                     of the British miners for nationalization; the rise of Italian cooperatives;
                     and the proliferation of the British guilds.

                     Labor Storms the Stage of History

                     In 1918, new electoral laws enfranchised men regardless of property
                     qualifications and, in Britain, also women, subject to constraints. This
                     meant that workers’ concerns now shaped the political landscape.
                        In Britain, the change in the electoral base (which grew from 5.2 to
                     12.9 million with the new law) granted center stage to the Labour Party,
                     which dethroned the Liberal Party as the main rival to the Tories. The
                     Labour Party won 4.5 million votes—eight times more than in prewar
                     years. Regardless of our judgment on the authenticity of the party’s
                     lofty ambitions to seize the means of production—as declared in their
                     constitutional manifesto of 1918—the characterization of this period
                     in the British historian Eric Hobsbawm’s observations are undeniable:
                     “For the first time in history, a proletarian party became and remained
                     a major alternative government party, and the fear of working-class
                     power and expropriation now haunted the middle classes, not so much
                     because this is what the Labour leaders promised or performed, but
                     because its mere existence as a mass party threw a faint red shadow of
                     potential Soviet revolution across the country” (Hobsbawm 1999, 187).
                        The November 1919 Italian electoral results were even more challeng-
                     ing to capital accumulation: the Socialist Party and the Popular Party 
                     gained the majority in the Chamber of Deputies—256 of the 508 total
                     seats. The Socialists alone obtained 1,840,600 votes and seated 156 rep-
                     resentatives (32 percent of the entire parliament), while the traditional
                     Liberal party all but disappeared. By 1920 the Socialist Party counted
                     4,367 local sections, and governed a third of all municipalities (around


                     76




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   76        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     2,800 comuni) and more than a third of the provincial councils. Social-
                     ists also directed 8,000 cooperatives. This was no ordinary feat, and
                     was partly incited by the party’s radicalization since the time of war.
                     Its immediate agenda targeted “the socialization of financial capital, the
                     suppression of state debt, the socialization of housing, means of trans-
                     portation and of big agrarian property and of the big industrial and
                     commercial business” (L’Avanti, August 8, 1919).
                         More dramatically, the Socialist Party also rejected any form of
                     parliamentarism. It fought fights in electoral terms and with a clear-
                     eyed revolutionary set of objectives. This most intense dissemination
                     of communist principles was meant to “facilitate the abolition of the
                     institutions of bourgeois domination” (Tasca 1965, 95). Elections were
                     thus understood as a barometer to measure the shift of power toward
                     labor and as a powerful means of cultivating class consciousness. While
                     the proletarian parties were growing in strength, so too were workers’
                     unions—with the two organizations being structurally interconnected
                     in both countries.
                         In Britain, the industrial capital of the world, between 1914 and 1918
                     trade union membership rose from 4 million people to 6.5 million
                     people, and eventually reached a record figure of almost 8.4 million in
                     1920. In just six years, unionization had doubled: 40 percent of the total
                     working population joined the unions. In Italy, the escalation was just
                     as impressive. The thrust of trade unionism into the urban and rural
                     proletariat escalated like never before: almost 3.8 million workers—
                     five times the prewar total—participated in organized labor protests.
                     What’s more, the socialist workers’ federation surpassed all others in
                     popularity. The CGdL grew impressively: in just the two postwar years
                     participation climbed eightfold, reaching 2 million members by 1920.
                     Especially combative were its adherent organizations: FEDERTERRA,
                     the “red league” of agrarian workers, and FIOM, the “red union” of the
                     metal workers.
                         The surge in union membership was primarily the result of the war-
                     time onboarding of new workers (and new kinds of workers): women,
                     the unskilled, and the semi-skilled. The war had given birth to a “new
                     and much more embattled working class” that had very little to lose. As


                                                                                                       77




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   77        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     we know from chapter 1, these workers had been deeply politicized by
                     war collectivism, and were seemingly disinclined to watch their own
                     subjugation. Direct industrial action was the most vivid expression of
                     this burgeoning politicization.

                     Strikomania

                     In Britain after the war, class tensions soared and strikes doubled com-
                     pared to 1912, the prewar year with the largest outburst of strikes. The
                     peak of this trend was 1919, in which almost 35 million working days
                     were lost to strike action—six times as many as the previous year—and
                     an average of 100,000 workers were on strike every day. Not just coal
                     miners, railway men, transport workers, and dockers, but also police
                     officers, soldiers, ex-servicemen, journalists, painters, teachers, farm
                     workers, cotton spinners, and many other groups of workers took to
                     the streets against their employers or the state.
                        Flipping through the pages of the Daily Herald of the years 1919–
                     1920, one encounters countless reports of direct action undertaken by
                     the country’s workers, giving substance to the idea that “[n]o one can
                     doubt the existence in the United Kingdom at the present time of the
                     most widespread and deep-seated unrest that has ever been known in
                     this country.”
                        In July 1919 alone, coal miners were striking throughout the country,
                     bakers were preparing a national strike against night labor, and police
                     officers were about to take to the streets. The latter fought to obtain
                     unionization, identifying themselves strongly as workers and spreading
                     political insecurity: the forces of law and order were not going to sup-
                     port the government. The Liverpool police strike of August 1919 found
                     solidarity among workers of other industries, leading to heavy rioting
                     and the intervention of troops. In the meantime, carpenters, tailors,
                     chefs, steel workers, soldiers, and builders were fighting to gain control
                     over the conditions of their labor, or at least to improve them.
                        The “strikomania” [scioperomania], as it was branded, did not spare
                     Italy. In 1919, the number of recorded strikes in Italy had more than
                     doubled relative to the prewar years, and as in Britain, had increased


                     78




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   78        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     more than sixfold during the transition from war to peacetime. In 1919
                     the workdays lost to labor disputes in agriculture and industry topped
                     22 million, and in 1920 rose to almost 31 million. The number of strikes
                     kept growing in 1920, involving nearly 2,314,000 workers (1,268,000 in-
                     dustrial and 1,045,732 agricultural workers)—that is, around 50 percent
                     of the labor force in the capitalist-productive sectors, including indus-
                     try, construction, agriculture, mining, etcetera.
                        Just as the reports in the Daily Herald provided a vivid picture of
                     strikes across Britain, so too did the Italian L’Avanti, the socialist news-
                     paper that saw its subscriptions among Italian workers and peasants
                     boom after the war. On April 2, 1920, under the headline “The Fierce
                     Battles of the Working Class” [le aspre lotte della classe lavoratrice], the
                     paper chronicled the national strike among public employees, which
                     lasted almost a month (see L’Avanti, April 28); the strike of the agricul-
                     tural workers in the Padania region; the strike of the bread-makers in
                     Brescia; the strike of the construction workers in Bergamo; the strike
                     of the railway men in Casale Monferrato; the strike of the telegraphic
                     workers in Milan; and the metallurgical stoppages in Turin, Florence,
                     Pavia, etcetera. On the following day L’Avanti ran a headline “Daily
                     Battles of the Working Proletariat” [le quotidiane battaglie del prole-
                     tariato lavoratore] and reported the strike of 30,000 paper manufac-
                     turers; the strike of the stonemasons in Mantua; the strike of the gas
                     workers in Monza; the mobilization of the farmers in Forlì; and the
                     final accords for the increase in wages of the textile workers of Milan
                     after a harsh stoppage of labor. During that month of April alone, Italy
                     recorded 195 strikes, with 229,960 participants and 2,454,012 workdays
                     lost. Women participated in high numbers, even leading the charge
                     in many sectors, including the textile industry, where the strike was
                     among the most combative and where women strikers outnumbered
                     men three to one (in 1919, for example, 148,832 women participated
                     compared to 44,991 men).
                        The news reports depicted not only workers’ struggles, but their un-
                     precedented successes: across the country, workers gained economic
                     and representational rights. By 1921, average Italian nominal daily in-
                     dustrial wages quintupled (around a 400 percent increase) compared


                                                                                                       79




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   79        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     to their prewar levels (Scholliers and Zamagni 1995). Such gains were
                     absolutely unheard of: during the twenty years of industrial develop-
                     ment (1890–1910) the aggregate “natural” increase of average nominal
                     wages had only been 53 percent. By 1920, nominal weekly wages for
                     British manual workers had soared 178 percent with respect to their
                     prewar levels—a high of £3.70 compared to £1.26 in 1910 (Scholliers
                     and Zamagni 1995, table A.23, 261). To give a sense of these gains, con-
                     sider that for an entire century before the war, the incremental increase
                     of average British weekly earnings from one year to the next never
                     exceeded more than £0.10. During the red years, Italian and British
                     workers fought for, and secured, a standardization of the eight-hour
                     workday. L’Avanti hailed the event triumphantly as “a conquest without
                     precedent . . . an unheard victory in the history of the world proletarian
                     movement” (L’Avanti, February 21, 1919, 2, Milan edition).

                     Strikes Get Political

                     As worker demonstrations proliferated, their goals evolved. What be-
                     gan as direct actions in the expression of industrial interests became
                     political—and on an international scale.
                        In both Britain and Italy, workers mobilized in solidarity with Rus-
                     sian and Hungarian workers to counter the anti-Soviet attacks that had
                     been waged by international wealthy interests. The most acclaimed ex-
                     ample in Britain was the Jolly George episode, where British dockers
                     sabotaged the government’s support of the Polish war against Soviet
                     Russia by refusing to arm a supply ship:

                          [T]he episode of the Jolly George, a vessel under charter to carry arms to
                          Poland from Harwich [Essex], acquired world-wide celebrity when the
                          dockers successfully refused to load its cargo, and it became clear that
                          any attempt to defeat the boycott by the use of blackleg labour would
                          result in a widespread sympathetic strike. . . . In Russia it was even re-
                          ported, and for a time believed, that the Revolution had broken out in
                          Great Britain. There was indeed a sudden wave of feeling among the
                          British workers, for whom the affair of the Jolly George, small though it


                     80




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   80        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                        was in itself, had a symbolic significance as standing for international
                        solidarity in support of the Russian Revolution against its capitalist-
                        imperialist enemies. (Cole 1958, 427–28)


                     A month later, July 20–21, 1919, CGdL and the Italian Socialist Party
                     organized a general strike, calling on workers across the country to
                     march in solidarity with their struggling Russian comrades. Later, in
                     June 1920, Italian soldiers and workers in the city of Ancona took con-
                     trol of the military barracks and refused to depart for Albania, which
                     was then under Italian occupation (see L’Avanti, June 30, 1920). This
                     action precipitated solidarity strikes and popular uprisings throughout
                     Italy, where the people opposed arms production and called for repa-
                     triation of all Italian soldiers. The movement ultimately contributed to
                     the full recognition of Albanian independence and the cessation of de-
                     ployment of Italian soldiers. However, after the war, the politicization
                     of strikes meant something more than direct confrontation with the
                     state on foreign affairs: economic movements themselves had become
                     deeply political.
                        What had previously registered as strictly economic demands, such
                     as hours and wage increases, were now considered as part of more sys-
                     tematic demands that directly involved the state (which had become
                     the de facto employer). The direct intervention of the state in produc-
                     tion meant that industrial struggles against the employers immedi-
                     ately developed into political struggles against the state—and thus to
                     demands that state power be used to bring social production under
                     democratic control (Clarke 1988, 199). As James Sexton, a British dock
                     laborer, commented: “there was considerable difficulty, if it was not
                     almost impossible, to dissociate political and industrial questions”
                     (Labour Party 1919, 119).
                        Moreover, unrest was no longer occurring primarily as an interven-
                     tion for immediate economic benefits. Quite the contrary: a large mo-
                     tivating factor was social revolution. An official British memorandum
                     of February 1919 stressed this shift: “The fundamental causes of labour
                     unrest” were to be found in “the growing determination of Labour to
                     challenge the whole existing structure of capitalist industry,” and no


                                                                                                       81




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   81        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     longer only in “special and smaller grievances which come to the sur-
                     face at any particular time.”
                        Workers rebuffed the core assumptions of capitalism. As the British
                     report put it, they were “no longer prepared to acquiesce in a system
                     in which their labour is bought and sold as a commodity in the labour
                     market” (Cole 1920a, Appendix 1, 250), and once put to work they de-
                     manded to be treated “not as ‘hands’ or part of the factory equipment”
                     but “as human beings with a right to use their abilities by hand and
                     brain in the service not of the few but of the whole community” (ibid.).
                        Frank Hodges, a miners’ union leader in Britain, described the
                     movement as a secession from capitalism: “He (the worker) wants to
                     know the social purpose of his work; in short, he wants to feel the joy
                     that comes to a man whose whole personality is impressed on the ob-
                     ject which he is in the process of creating, instead of being mere plastic
                     clay in the hands of a system which turns his whole being into a mar-
                     ketable commodity” (Hodges 1920, 110–11).
                        In Italy, the urge for popular self-governance spread like wildfire in
                     the factories and in the countryside across the country. While indus-
                     trial workers in northern Italy continued their call for control of the
                     means of production, agricultural workers paralyzed production in a
                     vast area of Piedmont and Lombardy (including Novara, Pavia, Ver-
                     celli, Voghera, Casale Monferrato, Mortara, Biella, and Alessandria)
                     for a total of fifty days during 1920, holding constant citywide assem-
                     blies (see L’Avanti, April 2, 1920). These strikes erupted in March 1920
                     and involved more than 300,000 people. Their demands were at once
                     economic (adoption of a global annual minimum wage, efficacious or-
                     ganization against unemployment) and, most importantly, political.
                     Agricultural workers secured control of labor within the production
                     process and official recognition of their employment bureaus (Uffici di
                     collocamento di classe).
                        Among the countless other revolutionary events in 1920, the peas-
                     ant invasion in Medicina, in the Bolognese region, stands out. What
                     began on March 22 was, by the evening of the second day, a display
                     of peasants “reunited in a march, carrying blades, shovels, scythes,
                     chanting the Internationale and the hymn of the workers” (Tasca 1920,


                     82




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   82        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     69–70), a remarkable scene of solidarity and organization. In a feature
                     written months later to describe the events, the political leader Angelo
                     Tasca commented that the peasants demonstrated “the most evident
                     truth” of the working class: to take on “for itself the problem of pro-
                     duction.” Tasca detailed how the peasants of Medicina put into opera-
                     tion their own institutions of governance and organization, including
                     an employment office that coordinated employment and a production
                     cooperative that furnished machines and fertilizers. Spontaneous local
                     “councils”—committees to discuss the technical issues of production—
                     were common. The community organized production according to the
                     “social necessities of nutrition,” not the organizing principle of capital.
                     Instead of harvesting industrial cannabis, they cultivated cereal, rice,
                     and medicinal herbs. As a peasant told the reporter, “One has to pro-
                     duce first what is necessary to eat, then one can think of profit.” The case
                     of Medicina spearheaded a national subversion of capitalist priorities.
                        Overall, the “red years” of 1919–1920 saw the call for workers’ con-
                     trol of land and industry reach its climax and become one of the most
                     important political demands of the British and Italian postwar labor
                     movements, taking center stage among the rank and file and even in
                     the official policy of the main unions.
                        What follows is an exploration of the varieties of workers’ battles for
                     the common objectives for a post-capitalist society: union campaigns,
                     agricultural cooperatives, and building guilds.

                     The Miners’ Struggle and the Sankey Committee

                     The Miners Take Charge

                     For the British mining community, World War I was a period of dra-
                     matic strengthening as an industry and dramatically increased class
                     awareness as an employment sector. The wartime state control of coal
                     brought a significant advance in the miners’ position, including of-
                     ficial recognition of the Miners Federation of Great Britain (MFGB).
                     Successful national bargaining directly with the state gave basis to the
                     miners’ audacious postwar program. By the end of the war, the min-


                                                                                                       83




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   83        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     ers’ union was powerful, nationally structured, and active in fostering
                     solidarity among different sectors. It organized about one million men,
                     making it by far the largest union in Great Britain. In 1919 roughly one
                     in eight people nationwide either lived in, or came from, a mining com-
                     munity, where “class bitterness and class solidarity in mining villages
                     was without parallel in the rest of British industry” (Morgan 1979, 65).
                         On January 31, 1919, with the industry still under de facto public
                     management after the war, the MFGB presented its demands to the
                     government for an increase of 30 percent in basic wages, a six-hour
                     working day, nationalization, and joint control—and warned that un-
                     less these demands were met in full, the consequence would be a na-
                     tional coal strike.
                         Politically, circumstances favored the workers. After the war the
                     country was experiencing a coal shortage: not only would a strike di-
                     rectly impede the provision of energy to households; it would also close
                     down industries in the early stages of conversion to peacetime pro-
                     duction and imperil the effort to recapture overseas markets (shipping
                     vitally needed coal). Moreover, the stakes were extremely high. The po-
                     litical situation was unpredictable: with the industrial unrest prevail-
                     ing throughout the country a miners’ strike could potentially escalate
                     into a political breakdown. For the Scottish Socialist John Maclean and
                     other influential members of the MFGB, “a miners’ strike over hours
                     and wages might, in the context of mass mobilization, pull in millions
                     of workers from other industries with potentially revolutionary results”
                     (Ives 2016, 47). These were not completely unrealistic thoughts. In the
                     early months of 1919, the forces of law and order were—in the British
                     government’s own estimation—unreliable. If upheaval occurred, the
                     likelihood of containing it seemed low.
                         Cabinet evidence shows that most ministers were hostile to the min-
                     ers’ claims. But given the circumstances, “in much haste and alarm”
                     (Morgan 1979, 62) the cabinet opted for a reconstructionist approach
                     and suggested that miners’ demands be investigated by an impartial
                     government commission under the neutral chairmanship of Sir John
                     Sankey, a judge of the high court. The Times detailed the tense setting
                     from which this commission emerged, how it represented a “breathing


                     84




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   84        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     space” that might allow the nation to avoid the perennial menace of a
                     resurgence of strikes: “A week ago the atmosphere was highly charged,
                     and there were all the signs of an approaching storm so devastating and
                     so far-spreading that none of the people would escape its effects. To-
                     day the air is clearer . . . [t]he danger of an industrial upheaval has not
                     been removed; but . . . [t]he miners will have full scope for providing
                     the justice and practicability of their claims at the inquiry of the Coal
                     Industry Commission which opens to-day” (“Lull in Labour Strife,” The
                     Times, March 3, 1919, 11).
                        The miners’ leaders accepted the offer, provided that the MFGB
                     were allowed to nominate half the members of the commission (the
                     other half representing the capitalist side). They picked the three
                     most charismatic leaders of the miners: Robert Smillie, president of
                     the MFGB; Frank Hodges, general secretary of the MFGB; and Her-
                     bert Smith, vice president of the MFGB and president of the Yorkshire
                     miners’ federation. They also nominated three experts who embodied
                     the reconstructionist spirit detailed in previous chapters: the econo-
                     mists Leo Chiozza Money and Sidney Webb, and the socialist historian
                     Richard H. Tawney.
                        Although some historians’ retrospective accounts (for example,
                     Mowat 1955, 30–36; Kirby 1977, 37) have tended to view the episode of
                     the Sankey Committee as an event that, by buying time, killed the revo-
                     lutionary potential of the miners, it is certainly the case that the work-
                     ers had produced a historical breakthrough. Their challenge to the pil-
                     lars of capitalism entered the foyer of the capitalist fortress. The threat
                     of direct action and its paralyzing effect sparked a political debate that
                     shook the heart of the British establishment, intimately involving the
                     parliament and the national press.

                     In the Foyer of the Capitalist Fortress

                     In their negotiations with the British government, the three miners’
                     representatives, together with the three economic experts, all agreed
                     on a basic point: free-market capitalism had to be denounced and
                     overcome. Smillie and Hodges openly addressed it as “the old regime”


                                                                                                       85




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   85        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     (Arnot 1919, Preface). Private initiative and private profit as the motives
                     of production were put on trial, thoroughly examined, and publicly re-
                     buked. The fact that “the commission met in the King’s Robing Room
                     of the House of Lords made its deliberations all the more impressive”
                     (Pelling 1987, 162).
                         The hearings, held under the watchful eye of national public opin-
                     ion, overthrew the status of private property—and private industry—as
                     an impenetrable domain. Arthur H. Gleason, staff member of the
                     American Bureau of Industrial Research, noted that “no such latitude
                     of questioning has ever before been permitted in an official industrial
                     investigation. Here you had a miner cross-examining a millionaire em-
                     ployer and driving him into a corner from which he did not escape”
                     (Gleason 1920, 34).
                         In fact, the first session of the hearings was publicly recognized, even
                     by the bourgeois press, as a triumph for the workers. The Daily News
                     wrote: “no one who attends its proceedings can help coming away with
                     the impression that it is the mine owners, not the miners, whose case
                     is on trial” (cited in Gleason 1920, 48). And again, in The Times: “there
                     will be no difference of opinion amongst dispassionate readers on one
                     point, which is that of the three parties concerned the miners come
                     out far the best. Their case was better presented, but it was also a better
                     case than that of the Government or the mine owners” (“The Industrial
                     Crisis,” The Times, March 18, 1919, 11).
                         The hearings were not simply a theater for the miners to demon-
                     strate their leverage. Rather, the Sankey proceedings laid bare the pro-
                     found failings of the prewar system of capitalist competition. Along
                     with the dismal picture of the miners’ working conditions, a critique
                     of the structural flaws of capitalism emerged. Economic inefficiency
                     “is not to be ascribed to personal shortcomings” (Great Britain, Royal
                     Commission on Coal Industry 1919b, 477); it instead sprang from the
                     very functioning of market competition, which impeded rational cen-
                     tral planning of the extraction and use of natural resources and in-
                     stead systemically led individual capitalists to try to pressure labor to
                     work more at inhumane wages and to save on infrastructure. In the
                     case of Britain’s largest industry, the effects of the invisible hand were


                     86




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   86        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     not as optimal as Adam Smith had promised. Numerous depositions
                     emphasized that far from being virtuous, competition for profit had
                     not resulted in collective prosperity. Rather, it had created a lack of
                     coordination and excessive waste, combined with a structural disincen-
                     tive to undertake the kind of long-term investment that was needed to
                     increase the supply of coal and keep prices low. Indeed, coal company
                     owners could guarantee high profits through pressure on wages: “We
                     have, in fact, as a nation, got the mine workers’ labour too cheap for our
                     economic health” (Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal Industry
                     1919a, xviii).
                        This modest attack on the capitalist tradition—an attack that as-
                     serted a contradiction between private interests and public gains—
                     reached economic experts at home and overseas. The 1919 article by
                     H. D. Henderson published in the Economic Journal discussed the case
                     of the Sankey Committee and concluded: “It is very doubtful whether
                     any considerable section of the consuming public would be prepared,
                     when it came to the point, to back their faith in private ownership at so
                     high and so obvious a price” (Henderson 1920, 273).
                        The problem of competition producing inefficiency could poten-
                     tially be solved by unification under private ownership. Another source
                     of inefficiency did not admit of such an easy solution. The antagonistic
                     relationship between capital and labor was inherent to the nature of
                     private capitalism. The solution, as presented by Sankey, was to accept
                     a new role for workers in the production process, one that satisfied a
                     “higher ambition of taking their due share and interest in the direction
                     of the industry” (Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal Industry
                     1919b, vii).

                     Nationalization and Worker Control

                     Clause IX of the Sankey Report announced seismic changes to come
                     in British industry: “Even upon the evidence already given, the pres-
                     ent system of ownership and working in the coal industry stands con-
                     demned, and some other system must be substituted for it, either na-
                     tionalization or a method of unification by national purchase and/or


                                                                                                       87




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   87        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     by joint control” (Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal Industry
                     1919a, viii).
                         Fearing a national miners’ strike, or worse, a strike of the triple al-
                     liance (the three main unions of miners, railway men, and transport
                     workers), on March 20, 1919, the cabinet accepted Sankey’s report with
                     its groundbreaking Clause IX. The Times voiced the extreme nature of
                     the events with the headlines in capital letters: “coal report. big
                     concessions to miners. effective voice in direction.
                     present system condemned” (“Coal Report,” The Times, March 21,
                     1919, 11). The article specified that “[t]he miners are in fact offered more
                     than nationalization, as that term is usually interpreted. The owners are
                     to go, as owners, and the only question is what is the best form for the
                     new system, which will give miners a direct say in the management”
                     (“To Strike or Not to Strike,” The Times, March 21, 1919, 11).
                         A second stage of the commission’s hearings ensued, this time deal-
                     ing directly with nationalization and workers’ control. Union leaders
                     Smillie, Hodges, and Straker (the secretary of the Northumberland
                     Miners), as well as Cole, who was asked to give a deposition, argued
                     for a binding relation between workers’ control and nationalization (in
                     the form of abolition of royalties and state ownership of coal seams):
                     “Just as national ownership is inadequate without workers’ control, so
                     workers’ control is inadequate without national ownership” (Cole, in
                     Arnot 1919, 33). Indeed, nationalization in itself did not secure the abo-
                     lition of the wage system, under which “the worker sells his labour to
                     an employer in return for a wage, and by this sale is supposed to forgo
                     all right over the manner in which his labour is used” (ibid.). The bold
                     demand was for economic democracy: joint control, shared between
                     miners and the state.
                         Workers’ control over the workplace was an emotional issue among
                     miners’ rank-and-file movements even before the war. These move-
                     ments grew stronger during the war, leading to considerable left-wing
                     pressure and influence in the coal fields and even on the policy of the
                     MFGB. What was remarkable in 1919 was how the core of this vision,
                     stripped of its explicit revolutionary message, had found circulation
                     within the establishment. It proposed a radically different image of


                     88




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   88        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     industrial society through governmental reform—and it had an audi-
                     ence. The appeal of the argument put forward by the commissioners
                     rested upon its reconstructionist tone, which turned workers’ control
                     into an issue of national rather than class interest.
                        Sankey’s final report was accepted by the six workers’ representa-
                     tives (thereby becoming virtually a majority report). It combined with
                     the Bill of the Miners’ Federation to emerge as concrete blueprints for
                     the democratic management of the coal industry. The two reports en-
                     visaged the avoidance of hierarchical bureaucratic administration and
                     the effective participation of workers in production through councils—
                     electoral bodies with substantial worker representation. A three-tier
                     scheme was formalized: Pit Councils, District Councils, and the Na-
                     tional Mining Council. While the latter had the chief coordinating role,
                     the other local councils held a large degree of productive and financial
                     autonomy.

                     The Rise and Defeat of the Coal Miners

                     The reports of the Sankey Commission were released in June 1919, to
                     wide attention in the national and international press. In his article
                     Henderson echoed the potential of these epochal events: “There is no
                     real guidance to be obtained from the experience of past or contempo-
                     rary institutions” (Henderson 1919, 269); thus, the new political experi-
                     ment offered “an objective and rallying-point to those who are seeking
                     to transform the whole structure of society” (ibid., 276).
                        According to Vernon Hartshorn, a leader among Welsh miners who
                     had given witness during the Sankey proceedings, the miners had un-
                     earthed a constitutional mechanism by which structural change could
                     take place in Great Britain. Commenting on the proposals of the second
                     report, Hartshorn wrote: “They go to the very roots of the capitalist sys-
                     tem. The recommendations comply with all the forms of constitutional
                     procedure, though they foreshadow change which is truly revolution-
                     ary” (South Wales News, June 30, 1919, reprinted in Ives 2016, 208).
                        Indeed, workers knew that coal’s “foremost position in the industrial
                     hierarchy” made it a vanguard case to accomplish a full-blown system


                                                                                                       89




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   89        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     of workers’ control (Hodges 1920, 114). The Daily Herald frequently re-
                     iterated the point: “the whole labour movement looks at the miners to
                     hew out of the capitalist system a platform from which it can make a
                     great leap forward” (Daily Herald, March 22, 1919).
                        The rising threat to capitalism was recognized also by the coal mine
                     owners, who repeatedly warned from the witness box that as they went,
                     so went Britain: “nationalization of mines must be followed by nation-
                     alization of all industries . . . retracting our steps [across industries]
                     would end in national disaster” (Great Britain, Royal Commission on
                     Coal Industry 1919b, 1054). In a hustle, the federation of the coal own-
                     ers, MAGB (Miners Association of Great Britain), together with the
                     national association of the chamber of commerce, coordinated a wide-
                     spread anti-nationalization campaign to win a battle that, if lost, would
                     mean “England will change hands” (Ives 2016, 226). Indeed, the battle
                     had to be fought: the controversy over the nationalization of the mines
                     dominated British politics throughout the summer of 1919.
                        However, in August, after months of procrastination and political
                     uncertainty, the government officially rejected Sankey’s final majority
                     report (which had won the support of seven out of thirteen commis-
                     sioners). Pressures from economic experts at the Treasury to abandon
                     state control of industry in order to safeguard public finances had a de-
                     cisive weight in the rejection. Starting in July, the government sought to
                     exploit the fear of poor fiscal balances “to paint the miners’ demands as
                     excessive and damaging” (Ives 2016, 232) to the national coffers. These
                     rationales were the early antecedents of formal austerity; the refrains
                     were picking up steam.
                        By that time, workers found little hope in fighting back. In March
                     1920 the end of the economic boom sounded a death knell for the min-
                     ers’ political power. Indeed, as Cole recalls, priorities changed: “Trade
                     Unions were more concerned with looking to their own defenses, in-
                     dustry by industry, in face of the threatened depression than with sup-
                     porting the miners or any other section in essentially socialistic de-
                     mands” (Cole 1958, 419).
                        This economic depression was not a “natural disaster,” but rather the
                     outcome of a well-thought-out policy of the Treasury and the Bank of


                     90




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   90        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     England that operated to drastically deflate the economy by increas-
                     ing the interest rate and curtailing credit. Monetary austerity inflicted
                     heavy damage on British trade, especially coal exports: sterling rose
                     against other currencies, making British goods more expensive than
                     those of other countries in world markets. Bad business meant a surge
                     in unemployment, which crushed unions and especially their power to
                     press for social change.
                         Such an austerity policy might appear economically irrational in the
                     sense that it damaged the economy. But it was very rational in that it
                     guaranteed the survival of capitalism and its relations of production.
                     G. D. H. Cole put his finger on the essence of the austerity counterof-
                     fensive, which will be explored in the coming pages: “The big working-
                     class offensive had been successfully stalled off; and British capitalism,
                     though threatened with economic adversity, felt itself once more safely
                     in the saddle and well able to cope both industrially and politically with
                     any attempt that might still be made from the Labour side to unseat it”
                     (Cole 1958, 419). In a nutshell, the economic downturn fortified capi-
                     talism. Not only were the pillars of private property and wage relations
                     reaffirmed—austerity also guaranteed wage repression and a resur-
                     gence of private profit.
                         Indeed, with the industry sliding into permanent depression in the
                     spring of 1921, miners lost most of the material gains they had obtained
                     during the war, along with the increase in wages once guaranteed by the
                     Sankey outcome. The miners’ strike that followed began on April 1, 1921,
                     nominally to fight for a national wage; it represented the last heroic effort
                     to counter declining living conditions. The strike went down in defeat,
                     when on April 15 the leaders of the railway and transport unions decided
                     to back away and left the miners on their own. This episode is famously
                     known as Black Friday: the moment the British labor movement was
                     forced onto the defensive. Later that year coal returned to inter-district
                     competition for business, and with it the full rigors of the private system.
                     By 1922 the miners who were still at work were earning about half of
                     what they earned in 1919; in just two years they saw a nominal weekly
                     wage drop of 46 percent (Scholliers and Zamagni 1995, table A.23, 261).
                         At that juncture, the retreat of the government from coal production


                                                                                                       91




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   91        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     meant that wage repression was no longer a matter of “political strug-
                     gle” that involved the state as the employer. Class struggle was once
                     more confined to the realm of economics, where the impersonal laws
                     of supply and demand dominated. As market dependence increased,
                     workers’ agency decreased.
                        To conclude, the miners’ movement for workers’ control opted for
                     an alliance with the state, but found in the state its ultimate defeat. As
                     we shall explore, the Treasury and the Bank of England were capable
                     of prompt reaction: they unleashed monetary austerity at the height
                     of these events. At that point institutional change became impossible,
                     caught as it was in the clasp of broader change in the name of auster-
                     ity: the new priorities were cutting labor costs and cutting government
                     expenses at whatever price.

                     Cooperatives and Guilds

                     Miners weren’t the only workers who sought to build on the industrial
                     reforms of World War I. Two other groups, the Italian cooperatives
                     and the British building guilds, embodied the same aspirations of the
                     working class. Although they shared the same goal with the miners—a
                     system based on production for use instead of profit—cooperatives and
                     guilds did not directly act against private capitalists. Rather, they exper-
                     imented with a different order of society within the capitalist system,
                     alongside private capitalists and with the aid of the state.

                     Italian Co- ops

                     In Castenaso, a small town of 6,000 in the Bolognese countryside, the
                     Italian government had requisitioned the town’s factory for tomato
                     preserves to produce the iron and steel that went into ships and rail-
                     ways during the war. Upon demobilization, the factory was sold to a
                     group of industrialists, with one of the terms of sale specifying that
                     the buyer would “enact the experiment of collaboration between capital
                     and labour,” otherwise ownership would go back to the state. The sale
                     proceeded, but the terms were quickly breached; following the ensuing


                     92




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   92        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     long workers’ strike and much negotiation, the government eventually
                     secured the termination of the industrialists’ contract. In March 1920 a
                     consortium of metallurgical workers bought the factory, granting use
                     of it to a new type of organization embodying the spirit of a workers’
                     cooperative.
                        The co-op’s 300 worker-members were organized in a commit-
                     tee structure operating under an administrative board composed of
                     elected co-op members. The organization’s constitution included speci-
                     fications for how surpluses would be reinvested, namely in the reserve
                     fund (50 percent), social insurance and instruction (20 percent), and
                     dividends among workers in proportion to their actual exercised labor
                     (30 percent). A month into their experience of free management, the
                     Castenaso co-op members wrote a manifesto for other Italian workers:
                     “We wish and hope the story of the Castenaso workshops can serve
                     as an example to all Italian workers—still oppressed and exploited by
                     capitalist gluttony [ingordigia]—so that they can once and for all re-
                     deem themselves from the servitude of the boss to set out courageously
                     towards a Communist Society!”
                        Castenaso was one co-op among many. The cooperative movement
                     exploded during the Italian “red biennium” (1919–1920). It was “a form
                     of reaction against the abuses of capitalism” (Buffetti 1921, 360) that
                     offered an overcoming of private capital accumulation and traditional
                     wage relations. Workers were members of the cooperative; thus they
                     owned their means of production and shared in their surplus.
                        A 1921 cooperative handbook described the nature of this alterna-
                     tive: “Industrial-commercial business are managed by capitalists who
                     aim for the greatest profit of capital invested”; on the other hand, “co-
                     operatives are managed by people who have in production a central
                     aim that is different from that of the capitalist—that is, workers who
                     want to benefit the most from their labor power. . . . The net profit that
                     in an ordinary enterprise increases the benefit of capital, in a coopera-
                     tive enterprise increases the benefit of cooperators” (Buffetti 1921, 35).
                        These institutions flourished thanks to state support. Important in
                     this respect is the (already mentioned) decree of September 2, 1919
                     (Royal Decree Law 1633, September 2, 1919, in GU 219 [September 13,


                                                                                                       93




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   93        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     1919], 7862), which authorized prefects to requisition land and give it to
                     peasant cooperatives for four years, or permanently. Also central for a
                     co-op’s livelihood were public works contracts (road building, schools,
                     etc.—see Ufficio Municipale del Lavoro 1920, 7–8).
                         Most cooperatives, especially industrial cooperatives, were often
                     short of their own capital, and thus relied on another outgrowth of the
                     co-ops’ relationship with the government: low-interest credit from an
                     extended network of cooperative banks. La Banca del Lavoro e della
                     Cooperazione, with branches in key Italian cities (Milan, Turin, Rome,
                     Naples, Salerno, Cremona, Magenta, etc.), and L’Istituto Nazionale per
                     il Credito e la Cooperazione in Rome were prominent facilitators. The
                     latter was endowed with public grants to give credit to cooperatives.
                         In the Bergamo province in northern Italy, 8 out of the 10 produc-
                     tion cooperatives that existed as of 1921 had been founded in the red
                     years of 1919–1920. Likewise, in the larger region of Lombardy, 41 per-
                     cent of the 87 cooperatives were born during the same period. Thou-
                     sands of workers, both men and women (since married women could
                     associate completely independently from their husbands), in the most
                     diverse sectors were co-op members: builders, masons, woodworkers,
                     glassworkers, agricultural workers, carpenters, tailors, miners, etcetera.
                         By 1920, when the CGdL led some 800 of these cooperatives, there
                     was seething unease among the country’s economic establishment.
                     Even in their gradualism, the extent and political influence of these
                     noncapitalist organizations was a menace to the status quo. Economists
                     like Maffeo Pantaleoni branded them “Bolshevik associations” [asso-
                     ciazioni bolsceviche] or “red cooperatives” [cooperative rosse], organi-
                     zations that were “destroying the bourgeoisie who had created all the
                     existing enterprises” (Pantaleoni 1922, viii).
                         Indeed, the statutes of the cooperatives were starkly democratic. The
                     template was the same as in Castenaso. Cooperative members could
                     only be workers; its deliberative body was the general assembly (the
                     ordinary meetings occurred three times a year), in which the members
                     had the right to vote on the annual budget and the destination of the
                     net revenue. During the assembly, co-op members elected the manage-
                     ment board from among their number.


                     94




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   94        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy




                     British Guilds

                     Like the Italian cooperatives, the British guilds were groups that collec-
                     tivized their means of production and were organized so that produc-
                     tion rested democratically with the workers, emphasizing local mana-
                     gerial and financial autonomy.
                        However, guilds in Britain went a step further since they got rid
                     of not only the pillars of private property and wage relations, but also
                     profit as the driver of production altogether. Like the miners, the guilds
                     intended to enable a “new industrial system” based on a new motive,
                     “the motive of public service under free conditions” (Cole 1921b, 17),
                     deemed far superior to that of private profit. Guild Socialist leaders,
                     including Cole, Frank Hodges, and S. G. Hobson, envisaged a starting
                     point for the full-blown realization of a guild socialist society based on
                     a democratic economy and a new industrial system.
                        In Britain, furnishing guilds and tailoring guilds were formed in
                     Manchester, London, and other cities; there were also guilds of agricul-
                     tural workers (at Welwyn, in Hertfordshire, an agricultural guild had
                     begun operations on a 500-acre tract of land), dock laborers, post office
                     workers, office clerks, musical instrument makers, and engineers; the
                     manufacture of packing-cases and horse-drawn vehicles too was car-
                     ried out by workers organized into guilds. The most successful among
                     these was certainly the building guilds movement. The University of
                     Chicago business professor Garfield V. Cox, who detailed the experi-
                     ment in the Journal of Political Economy in 1921, pointed out two favor-
                     able conditions that bolstered the builders.
                        The first had to do with the nature of the industry itself. Building
                     was an industry that required little fixed infrastructure (e.g., no fac-
                     tory or expensive machines), “so that the problem of the ownership
                     of the instruments of production is relatively unimportant” (Cox 1921,
                     788). For this reason there was not, as had been the case with the min-
                     ers, a binding need for a direct political struggle over systematized
                     nationalization. Second, guilds were good at picking their spots: “the
                     guilds compete in a field in which the capitalist system, with its motive


                                                                                                       95




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   95        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     of profit-making, has proved itself exceptionally incompetent to fill a
                     great and widespread public need” (ibid.).
                        As we know from chapter 2, after the war Britain faced an acute
                     shortage of housing; combined with strong popular pressure for
                     change, this induced the government to adopt the ambitious Housing
                     Acts. These initiatives divided England into eleven districts, with each
                     local authority held responsible for investigating the housing needs of
                     the community, raising the money to meet those needs, and accepting
                     contracts (approved by the Ministry of Health). The government would
                     offer subsidies.
                        In the throes of this expansionary policy, building guilds were able
                     to bid on housing contracts. In September 1920, the Ministry of Health
                     approved contracts with the Manchester and London guilds for a to-
                     tal of more than 800 working-class houses. By November, more than
                     eighty local guild committees of building-trade workers had organized
                     for work. By December, “contracts involving the erection of more than
                     a thousand houses had been accepted and were waiting the approval of
                     the Ministry of Health” (Cox 1921, 780).
                        The guild system was grounded in the spirit and principles of de-
                     mocracy inasmuch as it rejected the motives of capitalism: individ-
                     ual members were fueled by a “creative and cooperative spirit” and a
                     belief that “if men are given good cause to work well, and a sense of
                     freedom and service in their work, the results will be vastly different
                     from those secured by ordinary capitalist methods” (Cole 1921a, 291).
                     In practice, the guilds eliminated structural incentives to competition
                     among workers, rejecting individual payment by result and differential
                     treatment based on efficiency in favor of “a communal basis of remu-
                     neration” (Joslyn 1922, 116). Thus, wage contracts—which were based
                     on the commodification of labor—were replaced by a system of remu-
                     neration that recognized the social value of labor “which shall more
                     adequately meet the needs of the worker as a human being” (ibid., 97).
                     The so-called “provisions for continuous pay” (ibid.) were the core of
                     the building guild policies, providing for full support of the worker
                     during bad weather, sickness, accidents, and holidays.
                        Although each worker had a share of one penny in the guild, they


                     96




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   96        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy


                     were paid no dividends. The shares were merely symbolic, as the guild
                     had no intention of accumulating surplus value: “‘profit’ and ‘loss’ are
                     both ideas which have no say in the Guild system” (Cole 1921a, 291).
                     The guilds operated on a principle of cost-price service that was strictly
                     nonprofit. Accordingly, the state and local authorities—in entering into
                     contracts with guilds—paid the cost of material and labor at standard
                     rates, with an additional £40 per house that would ensure the guild’s
                     ability to maintain continuous pay for its workers. If the costs turned
                     out to be less than the estimated amount, nothing was pocketed; over-
                     ages were returned to the local authorities.
                        The experiment of British building guilds had attracted widespread
                     attention not only from British militants but also from foreign eco-
                     nomic observers, to the point that the most prestigious economics
                     journals expressed surprise at its positive results and were earnestly
                     considering its potential as an alternative for organizing production.
                        For example, at the time of the guilds’ first announcement of the
                     policy of continuous pay, predictions were largely pessimistic: econo-
                     mists thought that malingering would be rampant, and that workers
                     would endeavor “to make their job a convalescent home” (Joslyn 1922,
                     109). But statistics that were widely published and appeared in, among
                     other places, the Quarterly Journal of Economics and the Monthly La-
                     bour Review, silenced the doubters. The days lost by the building guild
                     workers for sickness and accident turned out to be fewer than those
                     lost in private business, both in Britain and in other countries. An
                     analysis of comparative labor efficiency showed that even according to
                     orthodox economic criteria, guilds performed far better than private
                     builders, allowing the former to underbid private contractors and save
                     local authorities money. Guilds could build houses not only of better
                     quality, but at lower costs—and not just for public authorities, but for
                     private clients as well. In the words of the article in the Quarterly Jour-
                     nal: “the evidence points unmistakably to the conclusion that the Guild
                     organization of industry, with its policies of workers’ control and con-
                     tinuous pay, has demonstrated itself superior, in respect both of quality
                     and economy of workmanship, to private enterprise taken at its mean
                     level” (Joslyn 1922, 127).


                                                                                                       97




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   97        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                        However, the peaceful approach of the guild socialists that sought
                     to achieve revolution through gradual change meant that in practice
                     guilds would have to operate and survive, at least initially, within a
                     monetary capitalist economy. Producing in a capitalist economy meant
                     that the building guilds had to purchase their plants, equipment, and
                     raw materials in an inherently volatile market. As guild socialists them-
                     selves realized, “it is not easy to isolate a particular industry or a part of
                     a particular industry and to make of it an oasis of Guild organization in
                     the midst of a capitalistic system” (Cole 1921b, 18).
                        Within an economic boom and with the benefit of state support, the
                     building guilds thrived for eighteen months. But the clouds of austerity
                     loomed on the horizon. By July 1921, amid a rollout of monetary aus-
                     terity, an economic downturn, and a mounting “economy campaign,”
                     the government decided to withdraw all state aid from local authori-
                     ties, leaving them stripped of the ability to finance housing projects,
                     even though less than one-fifth of the houses urgently required had
                     been built.
                        In 1922, the Geddes Axe—arguably austerity’s most malignant
                     policy, detailed in chapter 6—halted the expansionary housing pro-
                     gram, effectively beheading the building guilds and beginning their
                     decline and eventual disappearance over the years that followed. All
                     other guilds followed the same path, so that by 1924 there was no lon-
                     ger a separate and organized guild socialist movement (Ostergaard
                     1997, 77).
                        Cole commented on the encroachment of austerity:

                          The Building Guildsmen, who are as much interested in the provision
                          of good houses as in the development of the new form of democratic
                          industrial service for which they stand, have entered a vigorous protest
                          against the British Government’s breach of all pledges about “houses for
                          heroes” which it gave lavishly during the period when it was still the
                          fashion to speak of “reconstruction.” Nowadays, the word has vanished
                          from the language, save as an archaic survival, and the word “economy”
                          has taken its place as the governing maxim of political wisdom. (Cole
                          1921a, 290)


                     98




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   98        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                           the struggle for economic democracy




                     Conclusion

                     Following the economic interventions of their governments during
                     World War I, the working classes of Britain and Italy were uninterested
                     in a smooth reintroduction of capitalism. By 1919 the old system was
                     in full-blown crisis, and its component parts—workers, union leaders,
                     and economic experts—were all announcing the end of the old order.
                     Post-capitalism, whatever its form, was on its way.
                         What was the basis for this conviction, which was mirrored by a
                     sense of apocalyptic panic among the bourgeois establishment? Capi-
                     talism was strongly contested at its very core.
                         In these pages we have shown how political imagination toward the
                     abolition of private property and wage relations moved from abstrac-
                     tion to reality. In the first place, the soaring “strikomania” of the British
                     and Italian workers was political: it demanded new relations of produc-
                     tion. These demands took the form of the struggle for workers’ con-
                     trol that peaked in 1919–1920 with the objective of self-government to
                     secure the emancipation of the majority.
                         Certainly, the direct action of politicized workers was proving to be
                     a far more serious enemy to capitalism than the reconstructionist proj-
                     ect that the reader encountered in chapter 2. Indeed, the miners, the
                     building guilds, and the cooperatives directly attacked production for
                     profit, wage relations, and private ownership of the means of produc-
                     tion. However, the struggles we have encountered here share with the
                     reconstructionists a faith in state aid to defeat the old order through
                     constitutional means. To complete the sketch of capitalism in crisis we
                     must still address its gravest enemy.
                         Chapter 4 explores the movement for industrial councils that
                     emerged in the Clydeside region of Britain and reached its peak in Tu-
                     rin, Italy. The efforts of these rank-and-file workers took on a clear-cut
                     revolutionary form in opposition to both capital accumulation and the
                     state—and pushed capitalism to the brink. In this space, a class of ex-
                     perts found their most useful tool: a new rationale for austerity, one
                     that became the narrative of the threatened and powerful.


                                                                                                       99




                       You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   99        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 4

                     The New Order
                     Institutions and Thought after the War




                            We say that the present period is revolutionary because the working class is
                            beginning to exert all its strength and will to establish its own State. That is
                            why we say that the birth of the factory councils is a major historical event—
                            the beginning of a new era in the history of humankind. . . .

                            Antonio Gramsci, “The Factory Council” [Il consiglio di fabbrica] (1920d, 25)




                     Among the metalworker rank and file in Britain and in Italy after
                     World War I, self-government in the form of factory committees was
                     the basis for an alternative economic system—“a new order in the rela-
                     tions of production and distribution.” The system was rooted in the
                     elimination of private ownership of the means of production and wage
                     relations—the two central pillars of capital accumulation. The endgame
                     was a classless society in which “the proletariat dissolves as a class and
                     becomes humanity itself.”
                        These metalworkers shared the same objective as the miners, build-
                     ers, and farmworkers: building a different society that did not content
                     itself with the formality of political democracy but instead grounded
                     itself in economic democracy. In this sense the workers regarded the
                     divide between the economic and the political as impossible; they
                     battled for “the emancipation of the Wage-Slave” (Walsh 1920, 8)
                     through collective action and participation in production. In short,



                     100




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   100        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     there could be no political emancipation without economic emanci-
                     pation. In the words of the British shop steward leader J. T. Murphy,
                     “Real democratic practice demands that every member of an organi-
                     zation shall participate actively in the conduct of the business of the
                     society” (Murphy 1917, 4). Hence, echoed Tom Walsh, “a new spirit is
                     spreading . . . this spirit is not for a paltry increase of wage but for the
                     absolute abolition of the present system of robbery, the sweeping away
                     of Capitalism, and the Establishment of a People’s Commonwealth!”
                     (Walsh 1920, 4, capital letters in original text).
                        The strategies, however, differed. Whereas the miners with the San-
                     key Committee and the farmers and builders with their cooperatives
                     or guilds attempted an alliance with the state to overcome the pillars of
                     capitalism, the British and Italian councils declared war on the entire
                     capitalist system—defining themselves in opposition to both the state
                     and the private capitalists. Indeed, they abhorred the statism of the
                     more docile reconstructionists, and they refuted the reconstructionist
                     ideal of a transition from war collectivism to a socialist state, includ-
                     ing the notion that it would serve as the path to workers’ emancipa-
                     tion. State ownership was understood as “the final word in capitalist
                     domination” and “pregnant with sinister dangers for the workers, who
                     would become state serfs” (The Socialist, September 1916, from Hinton
                     1973, 47).
                        This radical movement was mostly led by left-wing socialists (later
                     members of the Communist Party) who rejected any form of joint con-
                     trol (among the workers, capitalists, and the state) and embraced the
                     drive for total proletarian power under the strong influence of the Rus-
                     sian revolution. They stood for direct action, which in the Italian case
                     meant the actual seizure of the private means of production during the
                     hot summer of 1920, when the workers ran the factories themselves
                     for almost a month. Starting in September, some half-million work-
                     ers occupied factories throughout Italy. Workers took control of the
                     production process: not only in the industrial north, but in Veneto,
                     Emilia, Toscana, Marche, and Umbria, all the way to Rome, Naples, and
                     Palermo. As the historian Paolo Spriano emphasized: “wherever there



                                                                                                      101




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   101        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     was a factory, a dockyard, a steelworks, a forge, a foundry in which
                     metalos worked, there was an occupation. The universal character of
                     the phenomenon is remarkable” (Spriano 1975, 60).
                         The legendary Italian factory occupation of 1920, discussed in detail
                     here, was the realization of the incessant practical and theoretical work
                     of the Ordinovisti, a militant group that revolved around the weekly pa-
                     per L’Ordine nuovo (The New Order), centered in Turin—the reddest of
                     Italian cities—and largely inspired by the struggles of the British shop
                     steward committees.
                         The movement led by factory committees constituted Italy’s most
                     explicit challenge to capitalism. By debunking bourgeois institutions,
                     factory workers also debunked kernels of the bourgeois worldview:
                     the belief that capitalist institutions are a fixed necessity; the belief that
                     workers are secondary inputs in the production process; the prevalence
                     of abstract theory over practice; and the strict division between the eco-
                     nomic domain and the political. As the following pages will explore,
                     the committees were a break from both the hierarchical relationships of
                     production and the hierarchical understanding of the world. This pivot
                     was the gravest enemy to the system, and an enemy that our economic
                     experts with their austerity doctrine were determined to defeat. Indeed,
                     these events are explored as detonators of the revolutionary fear that
                     prompted the emerging austerity counteroffensive.

                     The War and the Seeds of the Factory Committees

                     During the Great War, independent (often rebellious) worker organiza-
                     tions surged in Britain and Italy. Their rise can be attributed to a form
                     of combined antagonism: toward the state, toward the official trade
                     unions, and ultimately toward war.
                        As chapter 1 detailed, the wartime economic interventions of the
                     British and Italian states to guarantee a disciplined and mobile labor
                     force removed all notions of “naturalness” on the hierarchical relations
                     of production. In doing so, they also revealed the unbreakable coali-
                     tion between state and capital: “the capitalist class [in the UK] is more



                     102




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   102        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     than pleased with the State subjugation of Labour. . . . Capital needs
                     State ownership” (The Socialist, September 1916, from Hinton 1973, 47).
                     The Italian leaders echoed the same thoughts: wartime events only con-
                     firmed the true face of the bourgeois state as the “supreme guarantor”
                     [garante supremo] of exploitation (Togliatti 1920, 249–50).
                        Meanwhile, unions demonstrated their complicity in these power
                     structures and were no longer seen as reliable. They had surrendered
                     the right to strike, postponed their demands for higher wages, and ac-
                     cepted restrictions on the mobility of labor. The official 1917 British
                     Enquiry on Industrial Unrest documented the widespread rejection of
                     organized labor’s efficacy. The belief among workers was that “the ex-
                     ecutive officers of their unions are now powerless to assist them in their
                     present difficulties . . . that the Government when dealing with such
                     officials, ha[s] not been dealing with the general body of workers, of
                     whose real opinions, the executive or London officials of the unions are
                     now in no way representative.” Even Prime Minister Lloyd George’s
                     trusted advisor, Tom Jones, had to admit that “much of the present
                     difficulty springs from the mutiny of the rank and file against the old
                     established leaders” (Cronin 1984, 21).
                        The same British governmental enquiry detailed how animosity
                     from below resulted in the formation of “a vigorous defensive organ-
                     isation for the protection of the workmen inside their own separate
                     workshops, known as the ‘Shop Committee’ or ‘Rank-and-File’ move-
                     ment, with shop stewards elected from the workers in every shop.”
                     Against the orders of official leadership, the shop committee move-
                     ment practiced two interconnected forms of direct action: strikes and
                     workers’ control.
                        Strikes were effective because they stimulated the construction of
                     instruments of direct democracy: workers’ committees. Workers’ com-
                     mittees placed “the control of the product in the hands of the work-
                     ers themselves” (Gallacher and Campbell 1972, 31) and allowed for the
                     coordination of strikes, boosting the workers’ power to develop more
                     committees. Hence, workers’ industrial organization was the main or-
                     gan of industrial control—and potentially, of political emancipation.



                                                                                                      103




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   103        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     Strikes and workers’ committees marked the birth of a revolutionary
                     organization, one that was painstakingly refined during the war and
                     postwar years.
                         In Britain this development began in Clydeside, a dense area of mu-
                     nitions industries in Scotland that was at the forefront of the opposition
                     to the government’s authoritarian manpower policies. In February 1915,
                     during an unofficial strike for higher wages and shorter hours, metal
                     workers collectively organized so as to impede the divide-and-conquer
                     strategies of the employers, who tried to negotiate separately with dif-
                     ferent categories of workers. The first strike committees developed into
                     a more permanent body, the Clyde worker committee, that represented
                     all grades of workers regardless of their skill. The strikes of May 1917
                     were the largest of the war, involving 200,000 metalworkers for more
                     than three weeks. W. C. Anderson, MP for Sheffield Attercliffe, reported
                     to parliament that the unrest had insurgent connotations. 70,000 peo-
                     ple marched through the streets of Glasgow “with bands and banners,
                     every one of the members of the procession wearing the revolution-
                     ary colours” (see HC Deb 93, 5s, 14 May 1917, cc 1395–96; reprinted in
                     Coates and Topham 1968, 115).
                         By the end of the war the movement had become a nationwide phe-
                     nomenon. As the historian Branko Pribićević remarked, “[n]ever be-
                     fore or since has an unofficial rank-and-file movement exercised such
                     power and influence in this country [Britain]” (Pribićević 1959, 83).
                     This was no minor challenge to the capitalist system, given the workers’
                     explicit political ambitions. The Socialist of January 1919 announced:
                     “the striking masses have spontaneously created the workers’ commit-
                     tees, the basis of the workers’ state . . . these committees representing
                     every department in every mine, mill, railway, or plant, contain the ele-
                     ments of an organization which can transform capitalism into a Soviet
                     Republic. . . . All Power to the workers’ committees” (The Socialist, Jan-
                     uary 30, 1919, reprinted in Hinton 1973, 302). That same year, the Italian
                     worker Mario Montagna expressed similar optimism for his own coun-
                     try: “we believe that the construction of the workshop councils (consigli
                     di officina) represents the first concrete affirmation of the communist



                     104




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   104        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     revolution in Italy and that these councils of peasants and workers are
                     the basis for the whole future system” (Montagna 1919, 202–3).
                         The young Italian political leader Antonio Gramsci had been
                     closely monitoring the British shop stewards during their war strug-
                     gles, with a special interest in their autonomy, militancy, and conflic-
                     tual relationship with the traditional trade unions. Excused from war
                     deployment due to bad health, Gramsci undertook a crucial political
                     apprenticeship as head of the local section of the Socialist Party. For
                     Gramsci this proved to be a formative period; his work thereafter re-
                     flected a revolutionary spirit synonymous with the Turin proletariat.
                         Labor’s momentum in Italy rose a few months after the Clydeside
                     struggles, beginning with the Turin upheavals of August 1917. Turin, a
                     northern industrial city where anti-war and anti-capitalist sentiments
                     had escalated during the war, became the epicenter of the rank-and-
                     file offensive. For five days, thousands of workers, including a mas-
                     sive female contingent, protested the widespread economic hardship
                     by walking out of their factories, staging a general strike, looting shops,
                     occupying entire quarters of the city, and building trenches and barri-
                     cades against the troops and the police. The episode, led by the factory
                     committees of the metalworkers, took the “character of armed revolu-
                     tionary struggle, on a large scale.”
                         The dual strategy of strike action and workers’ committee
                     organizations—the same two-pronged approach pioneered by the
                     British comrades—was refined in Italy during the postwar years. As
                     Gramsci put it, “[t]he activity of the councils and of the internal com-
                     missions showed itself more clearly during the strikes.” In fact, the
                     councils’ “technical organization” and their capacity for action was so
                     well developed that strikes lost “their impulsive, chancy nature” and
                     it was possible “to obtain in five minutes the suspension of work by
                     sixteen thousand workers in forty-two sections of Fiat” (Gramsci 1921).
                         Indeed, by 1919 the factory workers’ committees had vastly extended
                     their level of inclusivity, competence, and influence so as to develop into
                     a qualitatively different form of themselves. They were now being ad-
                     dressed as councils. The Italian workers’ representatives could now be




                                                                                                      105




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   105        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     elected from among all the rank and file; they did not have to be union
                     members to move into leadership. Most importantly, the functions of
                     workers’ councils transcended economics to become political. A group
                     of workers based at the Fiat Centro factory well summarized their tasks:
                     there were immediate “economic” ones—including “the defense of the
                     interest of the working class against their bosses, to promote the associa-
                     tive spirit between all those who endure exploitation”—and more impor-
                     tantly, the long-term political objective “to prepare for a new society.”
                        It was the Turin metallurgical workshop Brevetti-Fiat—the largest in
                     Italy—that first affirmed the formal recognition by their employer of a
                     council of factory commissars in September 1919. The episode, Gramsci
                     recalled, “filled the souls of our worker comrades with enthusiasm and
                     active fervor” (“Chronicles of the New Order” [Cronache dell’Ordine
                     Nuovo], L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 18 [September 13, 1919]: 135) and was
                     quickly replicated throughout the city, producing over 50,000 commis-
                     sars and becoming a truly mass phenomenon. The tide of the council
                     movement reached beyond the pioneering metallurgical industry, into
                     wood, chemical, and shoe factories. Gramsci quoted a worker from the
                     Brevetti factory who enthused about how, with their new institutions
                     of self-government, workers had begun “the march ‘within’ the Revolu-
                     tion and no longer ‘towards’ the revolution” to reach “the greatest end;
                     the liberation of labor from the slavery of capital.”

                     L’Ordine nuovo and the Exchange of Ideas

                     Also in 1919, A. Hamon, a British correspondent for the Italian paper
                     L’Ordine nuovo, wrote of the developments in Britain: “The masses are
                     pushing for radical changes and the councils are meeting these demands.”
                     He detailed the diffusion of the British movement beyond the metallurgi-
                     cal industries, concluding his article with an optimistic note: “this orga-
                     nization has now reached a level of development that allows us to foresee
                     that it will extend to all the British proletariat” (Hamon 1919, 145).
                        The relevance of British labor developments to Italian audiences was
                     neither passing nor accidental. Palmiro Togliatti, one of the founders
                     of L’Ordine nuovo, explained the necessity of international correspon-


                     106




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   106        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     dence: “if we bring and continue to bring foreign examples, this helps
                     to demonstrate that the class-war follows everywhere a similar rhythm
                     and the same problems are posed in all countries . . . as we speak of
                     what the British do, the British comrades, as we have the proof, are
                     interested in our doings” (Togliatti 1919b, 190).
                         If the most impressive of the Italian “doings” was the articulate leader-
                     ship of the council movement, then this “collective and absolutely new
                     experiment” was catalyzed by the deep-seated commitment of the mili-
                     tants in the orbit of L’Ordine nuovo (“The New Order”). The weekly pa-
                     per, founded and led by four young Marxists—Gramsci (28 years of age),
                     secretary of the editorial staff and director; Palmiro Togliatti (24 years of
                     age); Angelo Tasca (28 years of age); and Umberto Terracini (24 years of
                     age)—began as an independent cultural-political experiment in May 1919:
                     “a lively and fecund exercise (training ground) of discussion on the fun-
                     damental motives of a communist society and its practical organization.”
                         The journal was a crucible of thoughts that spanned from work-
                     ers to socialist leaders and intellectuals. It documented and discussed
                     the revolutionary movements and theories that were sweeping across
                     Europe. It was the main sounding board of the program of the Third
                     International and its leaders, presenting articles from the likes of the
                     Russians Vladimir Lenin, Nikolai Bukharin, Grigory Zinoviev, and
                     Leon Trotsky; the Hungarians Béla Kun and György Lukács; the Polish
                     Rosa Luxemburg, active in Berlin; and Sylvia Pankhurst of England—
                     all of whom widely reported on the British shop steward movement.
                         The unique contribution of the community’s Ordinovista movement
                     was a formidable methodological breakthrough, or better, a new ap-
                     proach to knowledge that embodied the most groundbreaking conse-
                     quences of the process of the politicization of economics. This method-
                     ological innovation grounded the movement’s revolutionary charge and
                     was most devastating to the capitalist order. Indeed, the “new order” of
                     human liberation envisaged an emancipatory approach to knowledge.
                         The Ordinovisti stood fast on the idea that any approach to knowl-
                     edge was inherently, deeply political, since the lens through which
                     one looks at the world may foreclose or open spaces for imagination
                     and thus establish if and what alternatives—both conceptual and


                                                                                                      107




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   107        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     practical—are viable. While the predominant lens to interpret the
                     world foreclosed imagination and nurtured acceptance of the capitalist
                     order, the emancipatory lens opened up possibilities to envisage a dif-
                     ferent society. This was political.
                         There were four main features—still timely today—that define the
                     methodological breakthrough of the Ordinovisti, especially Gramsci
                     and Togliatti. Their emancipatory approach rejected all forms of
                     orthodoxies—both liberal and socialist—and especially negated the
                     epistemic stances of traditional economic science. To these writers, all
                     forms of capitalist ideologies—even those embodied in reformism—
                     fall. What follows are their four key and intertwined principles.


                     The Foundations for an Emancipatory
                     Form of Knowledge

                     Against the Naturalization of the Capitalist Order

                            Economics is not a science of economic reality “as it is” but is a science of
                            reality as “men want to build it.” . . . Economics is not a science if it is not a
                            practice, a will, a force that realizes itself.

                            Antonio Gramsci, “Socialism and Economics” (1920e, 265)


                     Togliatti and his comrades labeled the discipline of economics “the dis-
                     mal science of economic facts” because, dating back to the likes of
                     Ricardo and Malthus, it affirmed fixed “economic necessities”—natural
                     economic laws that are separate from us and are to be passively ac-
                     cepted. In this telling, capitalism is inevitable and human agency is not
                     guaranteed. And by internalizing the notion of the inevitability of our
                     socioeconomic structure, we come to feel powerless to bring about any
                     historical initiative. This sense of powerlessness reinforces the idea that
                     our capitalist society is fixed and functions independent of us.
                        This far-reaching ideological trap also transcends political affiliation.
                     In L’Ordine nuovo, Gramsci observed: “The socialists have accepted, of-
                     ten supinely, the historical reality that is a product of the capitalist ini-
                     tiative. They have fallen into the mistaken way of thinking that also af-


                     108




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   108        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.               6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     fects Liberal economists: a belief in the perpetuity of the institutions of
                     the democratic State, in their fundamental perfection. In their view, the
                     form of democratic institutions can be corrected, touched up here and
                     there, but, fundamentally, it must be respected” (Gramsci 1919d, 64).
                         The Ordinovisti challenged this “narrow vainglorious psychology”
                     [psicologia angustamente vanitosa] (ibid.) in the hopes of uprooting
                     capitalist omniscience. No institution, they argued—and especially no
                     economic institution—is natural; rather, such institutions are the prod-
                     uct of specific historical social relations of production. As Gramsci put
                     it: “No institution is definite or absolute. History is a perpetual becom-
                     ing” (Gramsci 1919e, 117).
                         In the view of Gramsci and his cohort, economic conventions such
                     as private property were not fixed and indisputable givens, but rather
                     the embodiment of collective actions that constitute a historically spe-
                     cific economic system—i.e., capitalism. In its simplicity this intuition
                     actually carries radical political significance: it allows us to realize that
                     strong and conscious class struggle may completely overthrow the cur-
                     rent order and reinvent a new social world.
                         Togliatti wrote that workers “put a limit to the absolute freedom of
                     the boss”; they subverted “the ‘natural’ conditions of the market”; and
                     thus, their labor power ceased “to be a commodity that is subject to the
                     iron ‘laws’ of supply and demand.” In other words, “men have rebelled
                     against economics: [now] their conscience and wills count more than
                     the ‘scientific laws’ of economics” (Togliatti 1919a, 72).
                         Workers’ councils after World War I impeded the “natural” price-
                     setting of labor as well as the “natural” laying-off of workers by employ-
                     ers. These were only the first steps toward a radical reconfiguration of
                     economic relations whereby the workers could gain full sovereignty of
                     their production process—elevating their status from wage workers to
                     self-governing producers.
                         In the local nomenclature, the revolutionary process was an “act of
                     liberation” [l’atto di liberazione] that substantiated the passage from
                     “oppression” [oppressione] to “freedom” [liberazione]. Indeed, this free-
                     dom was in the first place a freedom from market dependence, the most
                     basic form of economic coercion that to this day dictates our lives:


                                                                                                      109




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   109        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     under capitalism the majority of us have no other option than to sell
                     our labor power on the market in exchange for a wage in order to get
                     money to buy what we need to make a living.
                        These thoughts lead immediately to the second crucial methodolog-
                     ical breakthrough: the recognition of the central economic and politi-
                     cal agency of the working classes, who finally realize that they are the
                     agents of history; it is the workers themselves who are “revolutionary in
                     a positive sense” [rivoluzionari in modo positivo] (Togliatti 1919c, 196).


                     For Workers’ Agency

                            Make, work, find yourself—we say to the workers. The things written in the
                            journal, re-think them through, see them with your own eyes . . . only that
                            which is conquered by oneself has value and this is true especially for the
                            social battles and for intellectual life.

                            “Chronicles of the New Order” [Cronache dell’ ordine nuovo], L’Ordine
                            nuovo 1, no. 10 (July 19, 1919): 71


                     As workers came into a new status as protagonists of a political pro-
                     cess advancing toward a new economic system, bourgeois economists
                     categorically denied this agency (and continue to do so today). Indeed,
                     mainstream economists portray workers as substitutable cogs in the
                     economic machine—in essence, inputs in the production machine.
                     Workers’ only constructive action is their choice of moving from one
                     wage job to another.
                        Once again, after World War I the Ordinovisti shook these bien pen-
                     sants in their primary assumptions: “those who speak of fallacious il-
                     lusions necessarily imply that the working class always has to bend its
                     neck in front of the capitalists, [they] imply . . . that the working class
                     has to persuade itself of being incapable of having its own conception
                     to counterpose to that of the bourgeois, of having ideas, sentiments, as-
                     pirations, and interests that are contradictory to the ideas, sentiments,
                     aspirations, and interests of the bourgeois class” (Gramsci 1920f, 2). On
                     the contrary, workers were the revolutionaries whereby “being revolu-
                     tionary means working effectively toward transforming the whole pro-
                     ductive order” (Togliatti 1919a, 72).


                     110




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   110        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                               the new order


                         For workers in capitalist settings, a sense of being superfluous—or
                     being perfectly exchangeable with one another, and thus feeling power-
                     less against the forces of capitalist competition—might sound familiar.
                     Even today the orthodox models of economics support this perception
                     of powerlessness. The assumption is that the employer and employee
                     engage in individual contracts—where the latter is thus interchange-
                     able with another equally skilled employee. By limiting the liberty of
                     individuals, capitalism suffocates the collective.
                         By contrast, the Ordinovista movement stressed that the employees’
                     power came not as individuals but as a group. It is only as a member of
                     a class, as a producer, that the worker can perceive the absolute indis-
                     pensability and centrality of labor in the production process and in the
                     construction of a post-capitalist society—a society where the majority
                     is freed from wage labor and elevated to the position of self-governing
                     producers. The inclusive organization of the factory councils—which
                     superseded all labor divisions of traditional trade unions and united
                     skilled and unskilled workers—concretized this principle of collec-
                     tive agency. As Togliatti put it, “the title required for entering the new
                     system, that is the embryonal form of a new society, is only one: be a
                     worker, a cell of the productive organism” (Togliatti 1919c, 196). This
                     is why the factory councils were primarily and directly “an emanation,
                     an expression of the will of the workers” (Togliatti 1919b, 190).
                         A third (and arguably the most jarring) principle accompanied these
                     declarations of proletarian agency: its assertion repudiated intellectual-
                     ism and the technocratic approach to knowledge that is typical of bour-
                     geois economists.

                     Praxis

                            The concrete task of building the future cannot be undertaken without a col-
                            lective, collaborative effort of explanation, persuasion, and mutual education.

                            Antonio Gramsci, with Palmiro Togliatti, “Workers’ Democracy” [Democra-
                            zia operaia] (1919, 47)


                     Of course, ideas and concepts cannot be imposed from above; humans
                     rarely act out blueprints. The Ordinovisti reconcile the dichotomy


                                                                                                              111




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   111        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                  6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     between theory and practice with the concept of praxis—the idea that
                     theory and practice reciprocally inform and strengthen each other and
                     can reinforce the transformative dynamics already underway. Action is
                     thought, and thought is action.
                         Nothing could better embody this epistemic turning point than the
                     praxis of the Ordinovista movement: study groups, assemblies, collab-
                     orative discussion, and “mutual education” among workers and intel-
                     lectuals were the order of the day. In Gramsci’s words, “the articles of
                     L’Ordine nuovo were almost like a ‘recording’ of real events, seen as
                     moments in a process of inner liberation and self-expression on the
                     part of the working class.” The journal never endorsed “a cold applica-
                     tion of an intellectual scheme” [fredde architetture intellettuali]; rather,
                     it “satisfied a need, it favored the concretization of an inspiration that
                     was latent in the workers.” Gramsci continued, “we understood each
                     other so easily for this reason, so certainly we could pass from discus-
                     sion to action.”
                         L’Ordine nuovo was a collective effort composed of public intellec-
                     tuals, rank and file, white-collar workers, and university students, all
                     of whom supplemented their day-to-day practices with concepts that
                     could better clarify and invigorate their mission. Forming knowledge
                     was itself a political act. In the words of the journal, “[a]n economic
                     and political problem is not concrete in itself, but rather because it is
                     thought and rethought concretely by those who have the duty to trans-
                     form it into historical reality.”
                         L’Ordine nuovo movement was a full-blown experimental trial of
                     Marx’s Second Thesis on Feuerbach: “Philosophers have only inter-
                     preted the world; now it is the time to change it.” Thus the practical
                     experience of organizing within factory councils was understood as
                     the people’s “new school”: “The rallies [comizi], the discussion for the
                     preparation of the councils, have benefited the education of the work-
                     ing classes much more than the ten years of studies of the pamphlets
                     and articles written by the possessors of ‘the devil in the lamppost’”
                     [diavolo nell’ampolla].
                         The factory councils were the living expression of praxis; their regu-
                     lations guaranteed a melding of theory and practice that was in concept


                     112




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   112        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                                   the new order


                     essential for self-government. Part of this was the formation of a school
                     for the workers, which manifested in November 1919 in Turin with a
                     school open to all and focused on the theories and histories of capital-
                     ism and socialism. Moreover, within the factories themselves, execu-
                     tive committees were dedicated “to assur[ing] the free circulation of
                     newspapers within the workshop during the hours of break from work”
                     and “publish[ing] a fortnightly factory bulletin with the objective of
                     collecting statistics apt to deepen workers’ knowledge of factory life, ex-
                     plain the work done by the EC and the factory council, collect from the
                     newspapers news regarding the factory, etcetera.” At Fiat Centro, the
                     executive factory committee negotiated with administration to orga-
                     nize a workshop library “rich in books on industry, on history, and on
                     political economy” (“The Opinion of the Executive Committee on the
                     Workshop Councils,” [Il parere del C. E. sui consigli d’officina], L’Ordine
                     nuovo 1, no. 42 [March 27, 1920]: 335).
                        These projects, revolutionary in their motives, constituted a further
                     escalation against the most fatal of bourgeois ideologies—one which
                     economists were the first to uphold in their theories: the separation
                     between politics and economics.

                     Against the Political and Economic Divide

                            The communist revolution puts into practice the autonomy of the producer
                            in the economic and the political field . . . for political action to be successful
                            it needs to coincide with the economic action.

                            “The Instrument of Labor” [Lo strumento di lavoro] (L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 37
                            [February 14, 1920]: 289)


                     The Italian philosopher and academic Zino Zini gave the inaugural lec-
                     ture of the newly founded Turin school of socialist culture, a speech titled
                     “From Citizen to Producer” [Da cittadino a produttore], in February 1920.
                     He argued that the citizen, as typically understood in bourgeois democ-
                     racy, is an abstract individual, one who is “[s]overeign in theory, [when]
                     in fact he is only such on the day of elections, all the rest of his time
                     he is nothing but a subordinate to laws and rules drafted outside of his
                     contribution.” An individual’s political servitude is founded upon eco-


                                                                                                                  113




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   113        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                      6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     nomic servitude [servitu’ economica]. The inequality of economic condi-
                     tions (or better, the inequality of the positions within the relations of
                     production) impedes any genuinely democratic relations among free and
                     equal human beings. On the other hand, Zini wrote, the post-capitalist
                     society will give rise to “a new man” [un uomo nuovo]—the “conscious
                     producer” [produttore cosciente]—who exercises at once economic and
                     political freedom. It will be “the new society of free and equal producers”
                     [la nuova società di produttori liberi ed eguali] (Zini 1920 301–2).
                        Zini critiqued the abstract, indirect concept of political freedom:
                     in short, he said that political freedom is impossible in the presence
                     of “economic unfreedom,” the state of market dependence in which
                     the majority of people are forced to sell their labor power in order to
                     survive. The theories from bourgeois economists often concealed such
                     forms of economic coercion, but these were nonetheless felt by work-
                     ers: “Today all men, if they want to live, if they don’t want to die of hun-
                     ger and of cold, are obliged . . . to position themselves in the capitalist
                     hierarchy . . . the number of those who no longer feel able to adapt to
                     the existing social form becomes ever larger” (Togliatti 1920, 249).
                        The factory council, as “an absolutely original institution” of the pro-
                     letariat, was a strategic vehicle for toppling the pillars of capital accu-
                     mulation. It was also a venue in which workers could concretely experi-
                     ence political-economic unity: “born from labor, [the council] adheres
                     to the process of industrial production . . . within it economics and
                     politics merge, in it the exercise of sovereignty is all one with the act
                     of production . . . in it the proletarian democracy is realized” (Gramsci
                     1919b, 117). Indeed, within the councils, the organization of the produc-
                     tion process was deeply political. Thus, in their proceedings, councils
                     put into practice the core of an alternative society, one in which “the
                     mendacious bourgeois democracy” [menzognera democrazia borghese]
                     and its expression in “parliamentarism” was suppressed in favor of an
                     anti-authoritarian “self-government of the people” embodied in the
                     “proletarian state”—an institution that would no longer be alienated
                     from the people but rather be part and parcel of their daily activities.
                        In Togliatti’s telling, the new social order “traces politics back to the
                     economic, that is, to the collective productive activity of each man, and


                     114




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   114        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     in doing so, traces back sovereignty to its true and prime source, to
                     individual consciousness” (ibid., 71). Self-government, not to mention
                     the reunification of the political and the economic realms of life and
                     thought, was no small task.
                        The spirit of the movement also placed imperatives and pressures on
                     how the workers’ councils were structured, and in particular a focus on
                     ensuring that the organizations were both horizontal and fully repre-
                     sentative—a structure that assured direct accountability from the base.
                     Debates flourished on the pages of L’Ordine nuovo, in assemblies, and
                     in other proletarian venues. (These mirrored preoccupations in Brit-
                     ain, where between 1917 and 1921 the main leaders of the shop-steward
                     movement produced more than seven alternative democratic schemes,
                     often discussed in their main newspapers—Solidarity and The Worker.)
                        In Italy, the turnover of factory commissars every six months—and
                     their “obligation to announce frequent referenda in their departments
                     on social and technical questions and hold frequent assemblies”—
                     institutionalized the urge to keep the decision-making power with the
                     workers themselves. Moreover, in both countries, the council organiz-
                     ers sought to guarantee horizontal representation outside the single
                     workshop through a form of federalism: “central bodies would emerge
                     in every department, for every factory, for every city, for every region
                     up to the supreme national council [of the worker and peasant del-
                     egates].” The British workers’ organizations consisted of four main
                     levels: workshop committees, plant committees, local workers commit-
                     tees, and the national organization. Meanwhile the Italian councils
                     strived for a stable national network, including an alliance between the
                     city and the countryside—a central element for revolution, as the Rus-
                     sian experience had laid bare. The council aspired to channel the spon-
                     taneous fervor for land occupation (discussed in the previous chapter)
                     into structured institutions.
                        In sum, there were four intellectual threads that informed and mo-
                     tivated the factory councils’ subversion of the bourgeois approach to
                     knowledge in interwar Italy and Britain: the denaturalization of capital-
                     ism; the centrality of workers’ agency; praxis; and the unity of economics
                     and politics. This methodological breakthrough was a powerful element


                                                                                                      115




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   115        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     of the period’s crisis of capitalism; indeed, it represented a counter-
                     hegemonic alternative to conceiving the social world. No longer did
                     knowledge trickle down from above to bolster passive consent for the
                     current system. Now knowledge empowered action from below. That the
                     four methodological attributes found a concrete institutional realization
                     in the factory councils amplified the threat to the capitalist social order.
                        The tides of change were lashing at the shores of capitalism, at once
                     in the form of a methodological revolution and a political revolution.
                     Workers’ organizations expressed this twofold approach, embodying
                     the alternative foundations for new social relations of production.
                     These new institutions would upend, however fleetingly, the very con-
                     cept of wage-work and private capital. The move to seize the means of
                     production exacerbated the fears of the old order. To this day it repre-
                     sents a unique episode in the history of Western capitalism.

                     The Factory Occupation

                            Today, with the workers’ occupation. . . . Every factory has become an illegal
                            state, a proletarian republic living from day to day, awaiting the outcome of
                            events . . . the political capacity, the initiative, the revolutionary creativity of
                            the working class are now being put to the test.

                            Gramsci, “Red Sunday” (L’Avanti, Piedmont Edition September 5, 1920)


                     By the fall of 1919 the popularity of the movement among the Italian
                     rank and file and the labor leaders was at its peak: “The propaganda
                     for the factory councils was greeted with enthusiasm by the masses,”
                     Gramsci reported. “In the course of half a year, factory councils were
                     established in all the engineering factories and workshops, communists
                     won a majority in the engineering union; the principle of the factory
                     council and of control of production was approved and accepted by
                     the majority of Congress [FIOM] and by the major part of the unions
                     belonging to the Camera del Lavoro.”
                        As the political ferment of the council’s movement grew, so too did
                     the concerns of industrialists, who were quick to launch a frontal attack
                     against the councils. In March 1920, the industrialists Gino Olivetti,
                     president of the Italian Employers’ Federation, Confindustria (The


                     116




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   116        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                 6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     General Confederation of Italian Industry), and Giovanni Agnelli, the
                     owner of Fiat, met with the Turin prefect, announcing their intention
                     of initiating a lockout. As Olivetti stated, “two powers could not coex-
                     ist” in the workshop, especially when one of them “was a cell [cellula]
                     of communist society.”
                         The struggle between the metallurgical industrialists and the work-
                     ers erupted a month later, in April 1920, when industrialists attempted
                     to curtail the rights of the workers’ councils. The metallurgical workers
                     responded with a strike that lasted a month, with more than 200,000
                     rank-and-file workers confronting the armed forces. In the last ten days
                     it grew into a general strike that spread throughout the Piedmont re-
                     gion and beyond, mobilizing around half a million industrial and ag-
                     ricultural workers. On April 18, the Milan edition of L’Avanti reported,
                     “the fire of Turin, first extended to the province of Alessandria, includes
                     all of our province . . . we can say that almost all northern Italy is on its
                     feet against the right and the arrogance of the bosses” (L’Avanti, Sunday,
                     April 18, 1920, 2).
                         What was at stake was the existence and the legitimacy of the factory
                     councils, the future of workers’ control of production, and in general,
                     capitalism. After much bloodshed, the strike ended with an agree-
                     ment that recognized internal commissions—but also grossly limited
                     the powers of the commissars. The unyielding reaction from the Tu-
                     rin workers was expressed in the last bulletin of the strike committee:
                     “the battle is over, the war continues” (Spriano 1971, 100). L’Avanti com-
                     mented, “the Torinese proletariat has been locally defeated, but it has
                     won nationally as its battle has become that of the national proletariat.
                     The Italian revolution finally has a concrete plan, a real objective to
                     achieve: the control of production and exchange.” Indeed, this was
                     only the beginning of the struggle.
                         In the summer that followed, amid a bitter four-month-long negoti-
                     ation of a labor contract between FIOM and the metallurgical industri-
                     alists, the metalworkers’ union called for “a white strike”—a slowdown
                     of work to the bare minimum levels, an obstructionist gesture in the
                     eyes of the factory owners. The industrialists were quick to respond
                     with lockouts, beginning first in the Romeo factory of Milan. The Milan


                                                                                                      117




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   117        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     chapter of FIOM countered with the launch of a factory-occupation
                     movement that spread like wildfire. On August 31, 1920, workers took
                     over 280 factories in Milan, and within two days the movement ex-
                     tended in a capillary fashion across the entire peninsula. About half a
                     million workers in at least sixty cities took over factories, blast furnaces,
                     mines, shipyards, railways, dockyards, and non-metallurgical plants.
                     By the second half of September, shoe, rubber, chemical, and textile
                     factories had also joined (see Ministero dell’Economia Nazionale 1924,
                     174–97). Gramsci wrote in L’Avanti, “[t]he social hierarchies are bro-
                     ken, historic values overthrown. The executive classes, the instrumental
                     classes, have become directive classes” (L’Avanti, Piedmont edition [Sep-
                     tember 1920]; reprinted in Spriano 1975, 66).
                        In Turin, Milan, and Genoa, the occupation grew into a mass popu-
                     lar movement. It by turns captured, riveted, and alarmed the Italian
                     public. It bubbled with novelty. Neither FIOM nor the industrialists had
                     in any way intended or accounted for their industrial confrontation to
                     spiral into an unexpected revolutionary experiment: the enthusiasm of
                     the rank and file was about to produce something unimaginable.
                        Il corriere della sera, a mainstream Italian newspaper, vividly cap-
                     tured the improvised and vibrant beginnings of the Milanese occupa-
                     tion: “the factories yesterday evening presented a singular spectacle.
                     One reached them through crowds of women and children, coming
                     and going with dinners for strikers, voluntary prisoners of the facto-
                     ries . . . entrances were strictly guarded by groups of workers. Not the
                     ghost of an official or a police officer in sight. The strikers were com-
                     plete masters of the field. Whoever passed, in car or cab, was subjected
                     to control as if he were crossing the frontier, control exercised by vigi-
                     lance squads of workers and their enthusiastic companions” (Il corriere
                     della sera [August 31, 1920]; reprinted in Spriano 1975, 54).
                        Occupations proceeded in a relatively peaceful manner. The work-
                     ers’ anthem was sung, and red flags were erected to the factory fences
                     and chimneys. Battista Santhià, a worker on strike in Turin, described
                     the experience: “In those days it really seemed like the future of the
                     working class was in our hands. The master was overthrown from the
                     factory which was directly managed by the workers.”


                     118




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   118        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                        In one photograph in the Socialist Almanac of 1921, workers sit at a
                     table in a canteen. The photo is captioned “Communist kitchen dur-
                     ing the occupation” (Spriano 1975, 21). In other photos, occupiers are
                     armed with clubs and rifles, giving the clenched-fist salute. The most
                     symbolic: a group of workers of the factory council sit at the desk of
                     Agnelli, the owner of the greatest automobile factory in Italy. The hun-
                     dreds of thousands that worked, slept, and kept watch in the factories
                     were living the revolution in progress.
                        Factory councils took on the direct control of production in its en-
                     tirety; they had no other choice after higher-ranking technicians and
                     engineers left their posts on industrialists’ orders. The Ordinovisti ac-
                     tively participated in the occupations, broadcasting the work of the
                     councils in the improvised coordination of production, exchange, sale
                     of products, and the assistance and defense of the factories. In Turin, by
                     the second week of occupation, most of the working classes across all
                     industries were involved. Not only the small, medium, and large metal
                     firms (cars, coaches, foundries, service factories, railway material, ma-
                     rine engines, machine tools, typewriters, etc.), but also rubber firms,
                     footwear plants, textiles, and silk industries were occupied, extending
                     from the city to the province. In Milan too, the novelty of the second
                     week of occupation spread to the non-metallurgical establishments,
                     especially the chemical industries, which controlled the supply of raw
                     materials (see L’Avanti, September 11, 1920).
                        Production continued at its normal pace (still under obstructionist
                     orders from the unions), even with financial and technical restraints,
                     with workers without wages, and with difficulties in securing supplies
                     of materials. Here the workers’ cause was aided by the solidarity of the
                     railwaymen, who regularly supplied truckloads of raw materials and
                     fuel to the occupied plants. The council likewise organized exchanges of
                     raw materials among different factories (L’Avanti, September 10, 1920).
                        The struggle was meant as a demonstration—and glorification—of
                     industrial production in the absence of hierarchies and in the hands of
                     the workers’ councils. In the words of Antonio Oberti, a worker at the
                     Ansaldo Factory in Turin, “we had to demonstrate to industrialists that
                     also without them, and notwithstanding all the difficulties, we could


                                                                                                      119




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   119        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     produce the same and at maximum capacity.” Another worker, Piera
                     Stangalini, an apprentice in the Rotondi factory in the city of Novara,
                     recalled, “[o]ne worked with alacrity since we were all euphoric for be-
                     ing there and it was a great party because on the flagpole of the factory
                     we hoisted the red flag and that was all euphoric because I saw that red
                     flag flapping and I was thrilled. I was happy.”
                        The conciliatory sentiments of the establishment that followed re-
                     veal the power gained by the workers. First, the head of the govern-
                     ment, Giovanni Giolitti, categorically refused to intervene due to the
                     inordinate martial effort that the task would entail. Giolitti told parlia-
                     ment, “How could I stop the occupation? It is a question of 600 facto-
                     ries in the metallurgical industries. To prevent the occupation, I would
                     have had to put a garrison in each of them, a hundred men in the small,
                     several thousand in the large. To occupy the factories I would have had
                     to use all the forces at my disposal! And who would exercise surveil-
                     lance over the 500,000 workers outside the factory? Who would guard
                     the security of the country?” (Acts of Parliament, session of September
                     26, 1920, ACS, Legislaturua 22, 1st session, 1711–12). The heads of the
                     Banca Commerciale likewise assured FIOM of their benevolent neu-
                     trality, while requesting assurances in case the movement should have
                     a revolutionary outcome. Benito Mussolini himself—the leader of the
                     newly founded Fascist movement—took political precautions by de-
                     claring sympathy for the occupations (Tasca 1965, 127).
                        The revolutionary tension reached its peak on September 6 and 7,
                     when the movement expanded beyond factories to include land occu-
                     pations in the agricultural southern provinces. Although there was no
                     explicit coordination, the Socialist Party launched a concurrent mani-
                     festo aimed at peasants and soldiers across all editions of L’Avanti: “If
                     tomorrow the hour of decisive struggle strikes, you, too, must rally in
                     the battle against all the bosses, all the exploiters! Take over the com-
                     munes, the lands, disarm the carabinieri, form your battalions in unity
                     with the workers, march on the great cities, take your stand with people
                     in arms against the hireling thugs of the bourgeoisie! For who knows,
                     the day of justice and liberty is perhaps in hand” (L’Avanti, September 6,
                     1920; in Spriano 1975, 75).


                     120




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   120        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                         In the northern city of Brescia, one inspector warned state officials
                     that arms and bombs were being manufactured in the occupied facto-
                     ries (telegram, September 8, 1920, in Spriano 1975, 78). The minister of
                     interior, Enrico Corradini, likewise reported to Giolitti: “It seems the
                     occupiers have machine-guns. They claim to have armed a tank, [which
                     was originally] built at Fiat for the state. If this kind of thing goes on,
                     the crisis will become extremely grave” (ACS, Ministero degli Interni
                     1920, in Spriano 1975, 76). The prefect of nearby Milan, Lusignoli, made
                     plain to Corradini that armed forces could only defend a fifth of the
                     city in the event of escalation; Lusignoli asked the central government
                     to send a squadron of royal guards, troops, and carabinieri (ACS Mini-
                     stero degli Interni, Ufficion Cifra, n. 16, 325, 1920, in Spriano 1975, 179).
                     Here it became increasingly clear to the workers that their permanent
                     self-installment as self-governing producers rather than wage earners
                     constituted an attack “against the real centers of the capitalist system,
                     i.e., the means of communication, the banks, the armed forces, the
                     state.” Ultimately, however, difficulties in achieving national coordi-
                     nation and a common direction paralyzed this moment of insurrection.
                         The workers’ brief, heady experiment with free production eventually
                     came to an end with an agreement between the newly founded union
                     of industrialists (called Confindustria), FIOM, and CGdL. The indus-
                     trialists had capitulated, under heavy pressure from the government:
                     the owners signed a contract that a month prior they had refused to
                     even discuss. They had to accept unions’ control of industry, which they
                     previously strongly opposed, as well as significant wage improvements,
                     paid holidays, and compensation for workers who were dismissed.
                         On September 19, 1920, the government summoned the parties to
                     Rome and mediated the final phase of negotiations. Prime Minister
                     Giolitti, who had fully supported the CGdL’s proposal for worker con-
                     trol, asserted that the historic moment demanded a radical transforma-
                     tion in the relation between capital and labor. It was no longer tolerable
                     that in industry “one man should command, and thousands obey. We
                     must give the workers,” said Giolitti, “the right to know, to learn, to
                     raise themselves, the right to share in the running of the firm, to as-
                     sume some of the responsibility” (reprinted in Spriano 1975, 103).


                                                                                                      121




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   121        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                         The journalist Mario Missiroli described the fearful reaction in the
                     assembly of industrialists in Milan upon hearing the announcement:
                     “it was a thunderbolt. The assembly was struck by a kind of panic and
                     dissolved, to reconvene some hours later in indescribable tumult, a
                     confusion of words and ideas.” Several years later, union leader Bruno
                     Buozzi commented that “the victory of the metalworkers had no par-
                     allel in the whole history of the international workers’ movement”
                     (Buozzi 1935, 82).

                     Impressions and Reactions

                     Labor’s victory was far from satisfying relative to the revolution-
                     ary expectations of many rank-and-file workers. The PSI and FIOM
                     had recoiled from leading a general insurrection for the final seizure
                     of power, amplifying their conflict with the Ordinovisti, who accused
                     them of hesitation and ultimately sabotage of the popular revolutionary
                     momentum.
                        While historians today read this moment as marking a crucial end-
                     point for the postwar revolutionary wave, a more historically accurate
                     reconstruction requires that we not lose sight of the spirit of the time.
                     Indeed, it was part of a larger process toward drastic social change. This
                     understanding was not limited to socialist circles. In September, once
                     the agreement was signed, the director of Il corriere della sera, Sena-
                     tor Luigi Albertini, explicitly told then deputy of the Democratic Lib-
                     eral Party Giovanni Amendola in a phone conversation that “the only
                     thing left is to resign and give power to CGdL.” Albertini even visited
                     the reformist-socialist leader Filippo Turati and told him that the time
                     had come for the socialists to govern. Once back at his desk at Fiat,
                     Agnelli himself formally proposed to transform his whole company into
                     a cooperative. In an interview with La gazzetta del popolo he explained:
                     “under the present system, relations between managers and workers are
                     simply impossible. The masses today no longer have a mind to work.
                     They are moved only by political notions. Their recent gains are nothing
                     to them. . . . How can one build anything with the help of 25,000 en-
                     emies?” A few years later, Gaetano Salvemini would remark that “[t]he


                     122




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   122        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                             the new order


                     bankers, the big industrialists, the big landowners, were waiting for the
                     socialist revolution like a ram waits to be led to the slaughterhouse.”
                        From that autumn into 1921, the members of the socialist party
                     (from the maximalists to the reformists) and the Ordinovisti all fun-
                     damentally understood the occupation of the factories as a dress re-
                     hearsal for revolution. L’Avanti of September 21, 1920, announced that
                     “the conquest of the control of industry and the victory of the met-
                     allurgical workers cannot slow down the battle against the employers
                     [padronato].” The article continued, “this agreement is not the whole
                     way, it is but a step. The agreement does not end the class struggle . . .
                     this first proud blow to private property calls inevitably for more. If
                     the workers will know how to battle skilfully they will win forever.”
                     The Milanese rank and file interviewed for the article shared the same
                     revolutionary spirit.
                        L’Ordine nuovo was treated to the same sort of appreciation, in-
                     cluding from Cesare Seassaro, a socialist publicist and frequent con-
                     tributor to the journal. He proclaimed, “[t]hese memorable days that
                     will be written in flaming letters in the memory of the proletariat and
                     human civilization, have been the great maneuvers of the proletariat
                     army” (Seassaro 1920, 133–34). To him, the revolutionary vanguard had
                     to cherish these past events proudly to succeed in “the future final and
                     definitive invasion of the feuds of bourgeois tyranny.” The main les-
                     sons to take from the episode were the intensification of armament and
                     the urgent creation of a truly communist party to channel and guide
                     the revolution for the conquest of political power. “Revolution won’t be
                     avoided,” the article concluded. “Don’t rejoice, pot-bellied bourgeois,
                     since revolution is fatal.”


                     The Seeds of Counterrevolution

                            The present phase in the class struggle in Italy is the phase that precedes
                            either the conquest of political power on the part of the revolutionary
                            proletariat and the transition to new modes of production that will allow a
                            recovery in productivity; or a tremendous reaction on the part of the proper-
                            tied class and the governing caste.

                            Antonio Gramsci, “Toward a Renewal of the Socialist Party” (1920g, 3)



                                                                                                            123




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   123        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     The industrialists had undergone a transformative psychological shock,
                     and they emerged belligerent. They accused Giolitti’s government of
                     “complete absenteeism and connivance with the violators of the law.”
                     They further lamented that not one soldier or police officer was sent to
                     defend “property” and “personal liberty” (Letter of the Turin industri-
                     alists to Giolitti, September 10, 1920, in Tasca 1965, 141).
                         The neutralist behavior of the government was not the only factor
                     that incensed industrialists and agrarian capitalists. They viewed the
                     events’ concluding agreement in apocalyptic terms. There was also the
                     presence in parliament of a socialist minister of labour, Arturo Labriola,
                     who in interviews and statements spoke openly of a phase of transition
                     from a capitalist to a socialist economy. Moreover, as we have seen in
                     chapter 3, those years marked an assault on capital through reforms,
                     including measures against speculation, the taxation of excess war prof-
                     its, the extraordinary tax on property, the compulsory registration of
                     shares in the owners’ names, steeper death duties, the legalization of
                     land occupation, and much more.
                         In March 1920 the Confindustria had situated itself as a national
                     organization, complete with its own general political line and tactics.
                     Industrialists could now think of themselves as a national political
                     power—an “industrialist class” (Il corriere della sera, March 9, 1920)
                     with a centralized membership. Seventy-two associations were feder-
                     ated, with 11,000 members. All large industries, and three-quarters of
                     the medium- and small-scale industries, adhered to this association.
                     That August the agriculturalists had done the same: they founded La
                     Confederazione Generale dell’Agricoltura, which united large and small
                     agricultural property and industry. It was a new “political body of battle
                     and resistance to coordinate all the forces of property and agriculture
                     industry” (Bachi 1921, 302).
                         Alongside these developments, Gramsci’s analysis could not have
                     been more timely: “industrialists are divided among themselves be-
                     cause of profit, because of economic and political competition, but in
                     front of the proletarian class they are an iron block” Gramsci 1920f,
                     2). Both Lenin and Gramsci foresaw the unleashing of a bourgeois
                     reaction of a new type, one that went beyond the traditional liberal-


                     124




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   124        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        the new order


                     democratic framework—it was the coming of a violent civil war. The
                     impulse of revenge (an impulse the government failed to address) was
                     to be satisfied with Fascist violence. Fires would soon burn down many
                     worker organizations’ headquarters. Camere del lavoro (chambers of
                     labor), le case del popolo (citizen centers), cooperatives, and newspaper
                     offices were reduced to ash. Armed attacks would kill thousands, from
                     socialist majors to rank-and-file workers, until the ultimate advent of
                     the Fascist government in October 1922.
                        Tasca eloquently captured the counterrevolutionary spirit: “They
                     [the industrialists] received the jolt [scossa] of [one who,] having bor-
                     dered death and now returning to life, feels like a new man” (Tasca
                     1965, 129–30). He added, “the blood that they will have spilled will ap-
                     pear to them as a ritual of an expiatory ceremony, necessary for the
                     purification of the violated temple of private property” (ibid., 143).

                     Conclusion

                     This chapter has delved into the shattering of capitalism after World
                     War I as embodied by the rise of the factory committee movement in
                     Britain and Italy. The threat to the old order emerged from the war
                     struggles of the metalworkers against capital and the state. The threat
                     exploded in Italy in 1919–1920, where it reached a dimension second
                     only to Soviet Russia and Soviet Hungary. Under the leadership of
                     the Ordinovisti, for two whole years the Italian rank and file practiced
                     and advanced a concrete alternative to capitalism that found a test-
                     ing ground during the factory occupation of 1920. At that point it was
                     no longer a matter of whimsy to declare that workers had begun “the
                     march ‘within’ the revolution and no longer towards the revolution”
                     to reach the greatest end: “the liberation of labor from the slavery of
                     capital” (“Chronicles of the New Order” [Cronache dell’Ordine Nuovo],
                     L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 18 [September 13, 1919]:135).
                        The Ordinovista movement proposed a twofold break from the
                     capitalist order, one that was at once institutional and methodologi-
                     cal. Rather than being a means to strengthen peoples’ passive consent
                     to the capitalist order, knowledge became critical and empowering. Its


                                                                                                      125




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   125        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     war and crisis


                     emancipatory potential rested on the four main foundations explored
                     above: the abolition of the fetish of “economic necessity”; the central-
                     ity of workers’ agency (theoretical, economic, and political); the con-
                     nection between theory and practice; and the connection between the
                     political and economic domains. These foundations broke away from
                     any top-down and technocratic conception of knowledge—a concep-
                     tion of knowledge that the austerity experts would indefatigably strive
                     to reestablish.
                         The factory councils embodied such a methodological revolution.
                     Councils united workers of all ranks as thinkers and producers—to
                     control production, to end private ownership of the means of produc-
                     tion and wage relations, and to bridge the divide between economics
                     and politics in order to give true force to economic democracy.
                         The nationwide occupation of factories coordinated by the coun-
                     cils ignited the establishment’s greatest fears, and cemented the anti-
                     socialist bloc across liberals, nationalists, and conservatives alike.
                     These factions would soon merge in the armed offensive of Fas-
                     cism and a widespread austerity agenda that proved itself in its full
                     anti-labor force.
                         Mussolini’s Fascist regime represented more than stick and castor
                     oil—it was an “austere” fascism. The Duce surrounded himself with
                     economic experts who firmly re-imposed—both through theory and
                     policy making—the divide between the economic and the political
                     that the workers had breached. As we will see in the second part of
                     this book, austerity’s birth as the new champion of capitalism oper-
                     ated to foreclose any alternative to it. Indeed, in a crisis of this pro-
                     portion, either the organizations of people can move beyond capitalist
                     relations, or the ruling class will reimpose its rule. Austerity served the
                     latter end.




                     126




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   126        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Part II
                     THE MEANING
                     OF AUSTERITY



                     The crisis of capitalism that followed the Great War was, for some peo-
                     ple of means, an acute and terrifying development.
                        Once workers stormed the stage of history with ideas for an alterna-
                     tive society, the defense of capitalism took on novel and more power-
                     ful forms. Guardians of capitalism went back to the drawing board to
                     refurbish the old order, and their manufacture of austerity became their
                     main weapon. Austerity consisted of a twofold process, at once material
                     and ideological. Or better, it consisted of a twofold strategy—coercion
                     and consensus.
                        The coercion of workers was clear in the motto of austerity that
                     was formulated at two pivotal international financial conferences, in
                     Brussels (1920) and in Genoa (1922): “work more, consume less.” The
                     capitalist states and their economic experts secured capital accumula-
                     tion through policies that imposed the “proper” (i.e., class-appropriate)
                     behavior on the majority of their citizens. The three forms of austerity
                     policies—fiscal, monetary, and industrial—worked in unison to disarm
                     the working classes and exert downward pressure on wages.
                        The operation of this austerity trinity and its material unfolding as a
                     strategy for economic coercion is illustrated in the box below. This il-
                     lustration stresses the mechanisms through which fiscal, monetary, and
                     industrial austerity mutually reinforce one another. These general con-
                     cepts will be studied concretely in the chapters in this part; however,


                                                                                                      127




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   127        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     this analysis may help readers with the overall mechanics of coercion
                     under austerity.


                     fiscal austerity → monetary austerity

                     Fiscal austerity takes the form of budget cuts, especially welfare cuts, and regressive
                     taxation (i.e., tax policy that takes a greater proportion of money from people who have
                     less of it). Both reforms allow the transfer of resources from the majority of citizens
                     to the minority—the saving-investing classes—so as to secure property relations and
                     greater capital formation. Meanwhile, budget cuts also curtail inflation through two
                     main mechanisms. First, the reduction and consolidation of public debt diminishes
                     the liquidity in the economy, since debt-holders can no longer use maturing bonds as
                     means of payment. Second, budget cuts reduce aggregate demand: the general public
                     has less disposable income, and the state itself is investing less. Less demand for
                     goods and capital means that internal prices are kept down. Moreover, such stifling
                     of aggregate demand also increases the foreign value of the currency by discouraging
                     imports and thereby improving the balance of trade (i.e., ensuring that exports exceed
                     imports). Indeed, the foreign value of a currency is favorable if the balance of trade of
                     a country is favorable.



                     monetary austerity → fiscal austerity

                     Monetary austerity (or monetary deflation, described above) entails a curtailment of
                     credit in the economy, and it primarily coincides with a rise in interest rates. This so-
                     called “dear money” policy, in which money is harder to come by, increases the cost
                     to the government of borrowing money, and thus limits its expansionary projects. In
                     twentieth-century history, the limit to state expenditure becomes more entrenched
                     once the gold standard is reestablished (for Britain this occurred in 1925): in order
                     to maintain gold parity, the avoidance of capital flight takes precedence; hence, fis-
                     cal policy has to prioritize retaining capital in its economy. It does so by minimizing
                     government expenditure and creating a capital-friendly environment via lower taxation
                     on capital.



                     industrial austerity → monetary austerity

                     Industrial austerity refers to an imposition of industrial peace, i.e., non-contested,
                     hierarchical relations of production. Such “peace” is of course the basis of capital ac-
                     cumulation, as it secures property rights, wage relations, and monetary stability in the
                     long run. Industrial austerity also guarantees expedient monetary deflation—which
                     makes assets on hand more valuable. In fact, successful revaluation (i.e., an increase
                     of the value of money) crucially requires downward price adjustments, particularly
                     labor prices (i.e., lower wages), in order to cut the costs of production. This is because
                     lower production costs keep commodity prices low, thus boosting international com-




                     128




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   128        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                             the meaning of austerity


                     petitiveness at a moment when a country is seeking to improve its exchange rates
                     through greater exports. Thus, lower production costs are ever more essential to com-
                     pensate for a loss of competitiveness once the currency is revalued so as to not lose
                     foreign market share. If the state has enough coercive powers, as the Italian Fascist
                     state did, it can intervene directly to curtail nominal wages through legal action, thus
                     securing immediate downward price adjustments and ensuring the competitiveness
                     needed to achieve the gold standard. Of course, even in less authoritarian societies,
                     such as Britain, restrictive labor laws may limit the legitimacy of industrial manipula-
                     tions, for example through a criminalization of solidarity strikes. Industrial peace and
                     wage repression are also important to attract capital and avoid its flight, another
                     prerogative for gold convertibility. Low wages also decrease consumption demand,
                     which in turn decreases imports and thus has a positive effect on the exchange rate
                     that favors revaluation.



                     monetary austerity → industrial austerity

                     Dear money policy means that the economy will slow down because borrowing be-
                     comes costlier and investors are disincentivized. Once deflation kicks in and prices
                     decline, pessimistic expectations regarding future profits reduce investments further.
                     Less investment means less employment. Higher unemployment not only reduces
                     workers’ wages, it also ensures “industrial peace” by killing the political leverage and
                     militancy of labor.



                     industrial austerity → fiscal austerity

                     A weak and docile working class is one whose pressuring action for social measures,
                     progressive taxation, and other redistributive policies is subordinated to the austere
                     priorities of shifting resources, which favor the saver-investor classes. Unions forgo
                     radical proposals and practices that challenge private property and are willing to en-
                     gage in collaboration toward increasing the efficiency of production in the name of a
                     national cause.



                     fiscal austerity → industrial austerity

                     Budget cuts mean curtailment of public works and of public employment more gener-
                     ally, leading to an enlargement of the reserve army of labor (the pool of people wanting
                     to work), which jeopardizes unions’ bargaining power, depresses wages, and increases
                     competition between workers.




                        The circular blueprint we have just detailed makes an important
                     point in the story and history of austerity. Upon closer inspection, gov-
                     ernments’ austere fixations on balancing budgets and curbing inflation


                                                                                                         129




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   129        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     serve the main goal of making sure capital (as a social relation) is indis-
                     putable, and that its pillars of wage relations and private property re-
                     main strong. For example, the main achievement of fiscal and monetary
                     austerity was identical to that of industrial austerity: the subjugation
                     of the working class to the impersonal laws of the market. Indeed, all
                     three forms of austerity served to recreate the divide between econom-
                     ics and politics that war collectivism had temporarily suspended. Once
                     the state stepped down as an economic actor (and as an employer),
                     wage relations would again be subjected to impersonal market pres-
                     sures. Austerity ensured and facilitated this retreat to the norm.
                         Here emerges a core argument of this book: the main objective of
                     austerity was the depoliticization of the economic—or, the reinstallation
                     of a divide between politics and the economy—after the wartime po-
                     litical landscape had dissolved it. In practice, the reinstallation of this
                     divide took three forms.
                         Depoliticization refers to the state’s backing off of economic pursuits,
                     which in turn allowed for (1) relations of production (owners versus
                     labor) to revert to the command of impersonal market forces—while
                     also suffocating any political contestation of such wage relations, or of
                     private property. There was more to depoliticization, however. The fol-
                     lowing pages will show that depoliticization also meant (2) exempting
                     economic decisions from democratic scrutiny, especially by establish-
                     ing and protecting “independent” economic institutions; and (3) pro-
                     moting a concept of economic theory as “objective” and “neutral” and
                     thereby transcending class relations—the sort of omniscience that was
                     the foundation for one of austerity’s ends: building consensus.
                         These three conventions were mutually supportive. Cultivating a
                     notion of economic objectivity (3), for example, first required the re-
                     habilitation of the rule of the impersonal laws of the market (1). This,
                     particularly in a moment of high contestation, could only be achieved
                     through their unchecked governance (2).
                         Hence, austerity found its primary ally in technocracy—a belief in
                     the power of economists as guardians of an indisputable science. Chap-
                     ter 5 explores the consolidation of this powerful austerity-technocracy
                     partnership. It introduces the reader to two international financial


                     130




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   130        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                           the meaning of austerity


                     conferences, at Brussels (1920) and Genoa (1922), that contemporary
                     scholars have largely disregarded. But the reality is that these two
                     events were pivotal in securing the longevity of capitalism as a socio-
                     economic system.
                        As detailed in chapter 6 and chapter 7, economic experts—in their
                     high position within the state apparatus—constructed consensus
                     through economic models that excluded capital (as a social relation
                     of production) as a variable; instead it became a given. By embedding
                     hierarchical social relations within their equation, these neoclassical
                     models also replace the concept of exploitation as the basis of profit
                     with an idea of “market freedom”; labor is no longer the central mo-
                     tor of the economic machine, it is a choice or calling. Meanwhile it is
                     the entrepreneur’s capacity to save and invest that drives the economy
                     (note the vernacular switch from “capitalist” to “entrepreneur,” which
                     connotes a sense of individual achievement). Indeed, these models do
                     not envisage class conflicts between the capitalists and the workers, but
                     rather postulate a society of individuals who can all potentially save
                     (and invest) their money (that is, if they act virtuously) and whose in-
                     terests harmonize with those of the other members of society. In this
                     way, technocrats counteracted any critique regarding vertical relations
                     of production and justified capitalism as a system that benefits society
                     as a whole. The austerity economists conflated the good of the whole
                     with the good of the capitalist class. They postulated the national inter-
                     est as congruent with the interest of private capitalism. These beliefs
                     imbue austerity today, as then.
                        Austerity—both in its material form as a coercive policy and in its
                     theoretical form as a consensus-building set of theories—repudiated
                     the workers’ revolutionary wartime and postwar gains, especially those
                     of the Ordinovista movement. The group’s practical and theoretical al-
                     ternatives were the gravest enemy to the capitalist system, an enemy
                     that originators of the austerity doctrine were determined to defeat.
                     In fact, and as we shall further explore in the second half of the book,
                     austerity smashes the Ordinovista methodological/institutional foun-
                     dations. Austerity a) re-naturalizes the capitalist pillars of private prop-
                     erty and wage relations; b) denies the political and economic agency


                                                                                                      131




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   131        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     of workers; c) vindicates the priority of top-down economic science;
                     and d) reasserts the divide between the economic and the political.
                         This austere view of the social world is also reflected in its liberal
                     thought leaders’ support of the Italian Fascist regime. Indeed, as chap-
                     ter 8 investigates, the international liberal establishment was convinced
                     that Mussolini’s dictatorship was the only solution to force the austerity
                     pill upon the “turbulent” Italian people. Fascist political methods to
                     achieve economic success, however gruesome, could be largely toler-
                     ated thanks to their accompanying conviction that the economic and
                     the political were two separate domains. Chapter 8 details how liberal
                     technocrats played no minor role in consolidating Mussolini’s rule.
                         Chapter 9 presents empirical evidence on the motives and political
                     endgame of those who conceived austerity as policy. What was pre-
                     sented then and now—the rehabilitation of capital accumulation as a
                     means to save the hungry masses—has time and again delivered on
                     its true purpose: to facilitate permanent and structural extraction of
                     resources from the many to the few.
                         Finally, chapter 10 looks at the one hundred years that follow the
                     events narrated in this book to trace how austerity’s workings have con-
                     tinued to shape our society and have constantly protected capitalism
                     from potential democratic threats.




                     132




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   132        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 5

                     International Technocrats
                     and the Making of Austerity




                            The resolutions come to by the commission, which this conference is asked
                            to adopt, constitute a financial code no less important to the world today
                            than was the civil code of Justinian. The institutes of Justinian have been the
                            basis for the jurisprudence of not merely a large part of Europe, but of the
                            world itself. Here at Genoa there have been assembled experts in finance and
                            economics, each known in his own country as the leading authority upon
                            the subjects with which we are dealing, and their combined wisdom . . . has
                            resulted in agreement upon a series of resolutions which will be a guide, and
                            I hope a code, to be followed and observed in the same way as the laws due
                            to the learning of Justinian.

                            President of the Genoa Commission on Finance, Laming Worthington-
                            Evans, the British Secretary of State for War (in Medlicott et al., eds. 1974,
                            vol. 19, 705–6)




                     In the moment of capitalism’s gravest crisis, when the working classes
                     had stormed the stage of history, another set of actors entered from
                     stage right to take back command. Among them were “experts in fi-
                     nance and economics” who were brought together for the first inter-
                     national financial conferences—in Brussels (1920) and then again in
                     Genoa (1922)—and achieved unprecedented sway. Sir Worthington-
                     Evans, a British Conservative minister, in chairing the plenary of the
                     Genoa finance commission, had no doubts that the combined wisdom
                     of these leading authorities would serve as the foundation for a new
                     “financial code.” This code amounted to the core principles of modern-


                                                                                                              133




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   133        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                  6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     day austerity: “economy” (in the sense of cutting both state expendi-
                     tures and the expenditures of the working classes) and “hard work”
                     (again enforced on the working classes). That Worthington-Evans
                     would set these principles in terms as grandiose as the Justinian code
                     of AD 529 speaks to the power and scope of what they set out to do:
                     just as the Justinian code established the legal backbone of Europe, the
                     austerity code would shape our society, as in fact it has till this day. In
                     this, the assembled group was successful.
                         This chapter considers the code’s originating moments, at a pair of
                     high-profile and highly academic conferences which conceived and ar-
                     ticulated an international blueprint for austerity. The purpose was to
                     defend capitalism from its “enemies”; the logic was to blame said en-
                     emies for national economic troubles and to enforce upon these popu-
                     lations the sacrifice of hard work and low consumption. The circular
                     nature of austerity, in policy terms, guaranteed this form of coercion:
                     fiscal, monetary, and industrial policies operated harmoniously to re-
                     establish the economic-political divide, to re-naturalize wage relations
                     and private property, and finally to usurp peoples’ agency. These out-
                     comes ran in direct opposition to the foundations for an alternative
                     society set forth by the Italian Ordinovista movement that we studied in
                     chapter 4, and even in direct opposition to the British guilds of chapter
                     3 as well as the reconstructionist movement in chapter 2.
                         Rescuing the structures of capital accumulation meant quashing
                     all popular expectations for social emancipation following the sacri-
                     fice they underwent during the war. The prize of postwar reconstruc-
                     tion was no longer democratic control of industry, nor “a home fit for
                     heroes”; it was, in the words of the merchant banker R. H. Brand of
                     Lazard Brothers, London, the “hard truth” of “labour and suffering”
                     (League of Nations, Brussels International Finance Conference 1920,
                     Verbatim Record, vol. 2, 20; documents from the Brussels conference
                     will hereafter be cited as Brussels 1920 followed by volume and page
                     numbers). These ideas resonated with his expert colleagues at the con-
                     ferences. Lord Robert Chalmers, the former permanent secretary at
                     the British Treasury, noted that to regain “equilibrium,” the “painful”



                     134




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   134        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     solution was to “work hard, live hard, and save hard” (Brussels 1920,
                     Verbatim Record, vol. 2, 26–27, italics added).
                        Such a frontal attack on labor—one that would slash social resources
                     and wages and especially kill visions of an alternative society—required
                     a sturdy justification. The authority of the experts provided a channel
                     to build consensus for a truth that, even if hard and painful, was “uni-
                     versal” and “objective,” and thus had to be swallowed. For these tech-
                     nocrats, austerity’s rationality was synonymous with rationality itself,
                     because they held that the capitalist order was the only order possible.

                     Reassessing Brussels and Genoa

                     In February 1920, the Council of the League of Nations met in London
                     to summon the “world’s first International Financial Conference,” to be
                     held in Brussels from September 24 to October 4, 1920. Thirty-nine na-
                     tions were called to the table, representing three-quarters of the world’s
                     population. The conference had the primary objective of “studying the
                     financial crisis and looking for the means of remedying and of mitigat-
                     ing the dangerous consequences arising from it” (Brussels 1920, Report
                     of the International Financial Conference, vol. 1, 3).
                         Less than two years later, at a moment when inflation in Britain
                     had been dramatically replaced by deflation and a troubling eco-
                     nomic slump, the Supreme Council of the Allies announced the Genoa
                     economic-financial conference (April 10–May 19, 1922). The aim, yet
                     again, was to tackle the economic crisis and to reestablish normal eco-
                     nomic conditions in a spirit of cooperation among nations toward the
                     “pacification of Europe and its reconstruction.”
                         Scholars have largely ignored the Brussels conference, while noting
                     the one in Genoa primarily for its diplomatic impact. The few eco-
                     nomic historians who have studied the conferences speak of a fiasco.
                     For example, in his famous Golden Fetters, Barry Eichengreen talks
                     about their “failure to provide a framework for systematic interna-
                     tional cooperation” (Eichengreen 1992, 153), mainly due to a congeni-
                     tal limitation: the unresolved issues of war debts and reparations were



                                                                                                      135




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   135        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     expressly excluded from the agenda of the conferences, thereby elimi-
                     nating the chance that the meetings would have any great or lasting rel-
                     evance. Eichengreen’s observations echoed those of earlier economists
                     like John Maynard Keynes, Gustav Cassel, and Francesco Saverio Nitti,
                     who collaborated on a 1922 special issue of the Manchester Guardian
                     Commercial regarding the events at Genoa. These voices agreed that
                     the mutual assistance cited by Eichengreen as missing was a mirage to
                     begin with. In the words of the Economist, no “plan has been evolved
                     under which the Governments of relatively prosperous states shall
                     help out their weaker neighbours” (“Brussels,” Economist, October 16,
                     1920, 579).
                         This common assessment of the meetings as having accomplished
                     nothing changes drastically if one adopts a different lens—one that
                     acknowledges the centrality of class struggle to the moment in which
                     the participants were gathered. With this new perspective the confer-
                     ences acquire a central and foundational role, which has until now been
                     disregarded. They were in fact the pioneers of the modern version of
                     austerity, embodied, as we shall see, in the essential motto: “economy”
                     and “hard work.”
                         The conferences succeeded in establishing an agenda to solidify the
                     faltering pillars of capitalism. While the capitalist powers may have
                     failed in their horizontal relationship—establishing a system of power
                     with one another—they most certainly achieved success in their verti-
                     cal relationship—to labor, that is, in subjugating it.
                         Stanford economics professor Joseph S. Davis commended Brussels
                     as a “conference of specialists in financial disease.” Their assembly “for
                     diagnosis of the acute illness of the nations” was a victory, Davis ar-
                     gued, in that the attendees reached “unanimous agreement upon the
                     main points of a diagnosis and upon the mode of treatment appropriate
                     to the present stages of the disease” (Davis 1920, 350). Davis’s claim of a
                     unanimous agreement was centered less on international cooperation
                     than on austerity. Or better, international cooperation found useful ex-
                     pression in austerity, with the latter silencing the powerful enemies of
                     capital accumulation and foreclosing any noncapitalist alternatives of
                     postwar reconstruction, including projects for economic democracy.


                     136




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   136        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                        The same Economist article that had stressed the conference’s fail-
                     ure to achieve a plan of mutual assistance highlighted the importance
                     of the Brussels conference in setting an international austerity agenda.
                     The article bemoaned “the tendency to minimise the importance of
                     the [conference] resolutions” (“Brussels,” Economist, [October 16,
                     1920]: 579) and congratulated the delegates for “securing, against many
                     powerful advocates, the acceptance by the conference of the policy of
                     deflation, of course gradual, as opposed to that of devaluation, and also
                     that of dear money as opposed to the prevailing continental doctrine
                     of low rates” (ibid., my italics). The magazine added that the attendees’
                     consensus on monetary austerity went hand in hand with an agree-
                     ment on the inevitability of fiscal austerity: “The representatives of the
                     weaker states have gone back strengthened in the conviction that sound
                     finance is not only the right policy, but the only possible policy for their
                     countries if they are to secure foreign confidence and assistance” (ibid.,
                     580). Accepting this necessity for austerity provided “the basis of any
                     economic recovery of Europe” (ibid., 579). In 1922, the Genoa financial
                     conference reaffirmed the unanimity on austerity principles.
                        In sum, the two conferences reunited the European establishment
                     under the flag of technocracy to construct and implement austerity.
                     Technocrats were rising as the new protectors of capitalism—and their
                     sermon was heard loud and clear across the continent.

                     Technocrats Take Charge

                     Economic observers expressed a real excitement for the high scientific
                     quality of the Brussels conference. The technical footprint of the con-
                     ference, or at least the prevalence of the “economic” over the “politi-
                     cal,” was discernible in a number of ways. In the first place, the social
                     composition of the national delegations was mainly without explicit
                     political affiliation and was noticeably purged of working-class voices.
                     Of the delegates of each country, wrote the economics professor H. A.
                     Siepmann, “very few of the representatives were either politicians or
                     diplomats, but fewer still were representatives of Labour” (Siepmann
                     1920, 443). Countries were not expected to include representatives of


                                                                                                      137




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   137        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     labor in their delegation. Rather, as Davis noted, “[t]he representatives
                     were in the main leading bankers and treasury officials, who ‘attended
                     as experts and not as spokesmen of [existing] official policy’” (Davis
                     1920, 349).
                        Secondly, technical documentation was unprecedentedly abundant.
                     The secretariat of the League of Nations requested prior to the meet-
                     ing that states and their banks submit information on currency, public
                     finance, international trade, retail prices, and coal production, thereby
                     collecting a considerable amount of economic statistics. Siepmann
                     highlighted that “[n]o Conference was ever so well provided with doc-
                     uments as this one” (Siepmann 1920, 441). He reported them to have
                     “an aggregate thickness of four inches” (ibid., 436). Davis praised the
                     “great advance in the utilization of statistics by an international confer-
                     ence” and the sophisticated efforts to standardize national statistics (on
                     budgets, for example) for international and comparative use.
                        Thirdly, and most importantly, it was specifically economics profes-
                     sors who drafted the most influential body of memoranda. Here the
                     (self-adulating) biases of the conference’s advisory committee were on
                     display: they defended the decision to invite only the “leading econ-
                     omists of international repute” on the basis that, unlike the different
                     delegations from other fields, they would not represent “the individual
                     national point of view” but rather “the world point of view” (Report of
                     the Advisory Committee, Brussels 1920, 9).
                        The systematic use of academic expertise and its full-blown justi-
                     fication as being “above bias” was impressive. Thus, five prominent
                     economists, professors all, took the stage: Maffeo Pantaleoni (Italy),
                     Charles Gide (France), Gijsbert Weijer Jan Bruins (Holland), Arthur
                     Cecile Pigou (Great Britain), and Gustav Cassel (Sweden). They sub-
                     mitted individual papers to instruct conference participants. Subse-
                     quently, the five acceded to a request and met and prepared a joint
                     statement that set the stage for the austerity agenda of the conference.
                     The final official resolutions of Brussels fully incorporated the experts’
                     “scientific” advice.
                        Similarly, the financial commission of the Genoa conference two



                     138




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   138        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     years later heeded the advice of economic scholars, financiers, busi-
                     nessmen, and bankers. Treasury official Sir Basil Blackett, who will
                     be a pivotal actor in this story, headed a committee of experts that in-
                     cluded other highly regarded figures: R. H. Brand, the Swedish econ-
                     omist Gustav Cassel, the Dutch central banker Gerard Vissering, the
                     German central banker Rudolf Hevenstein, and Henry Strakosch, the
                     future chairman of the Economist. These experts had already met in
                     London a few months prior to package an austerity plan. On that occa-
                     sion, it was the British Treasury’s in-house economist, Ralph Hawtrey,
                     another protagonist from whom we will hear more in chapter 6, who
                     took the lead to prescribe drastic austerity as a “natural” antidote
                     against capitalist crisis. The official resolutions of the Genoa conference
                     fully transcribed Hawtrey’s austerity therapy, and they were accepted
                     with almost no debate.
                         The proceedings of these two conferences embodied the first funda-
                     mental feature of technocracy, or rule via economic expertise: econo-
                     mists acquire unprecedented influence in advising and implementing
                     economic policies. This type of social authority holds to the extent that
                     the second fundamental feature of technocracy also holds: economists
                     have achieved a “classless” and “neutral” status. They are recognized as
                     spokespersons of universal and value-free truths about the economy,
                     viewed as an ahistorical object. Austerity embodies the enforcement of
                     these “truths,” and as such is inherently technocratic.
                         Davis’s characterization of the Brussels conference as benefiting from
                     the technocratic attendees and their data-driven arguments shows the
                     bourgeois urge to concretely reconfigure society: “Its prestige was con-
                     siderable; the unanimity of its conclusions is impressive; its views are
                     probably in the main those of financial leaders in most countries. There
                     is therefore reason to believe that influential pressure will be brought to
                     bear upon the various European governments to heed the recommen-
                     dations and put them into operation” (Davis 1920, 359).
                         In the following sections, we will explore those very recommenda-
                     tions to see how these technocrats planned to turn austerity’s principles
                     of “economy” and “hard work” into reality.



                                                                                                      139




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   139        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     On the Nature and Purpose of Austerity

                            Without paying your way as a nation, without getting that equilibrium and
                            stability which is at the basis of confidence, there can be no hope whatsoever.
                            To that we have to devote all our energies. How are we to do it? I think the
                            answer is a very painful one and yet a very simple one. It is this: that we must
                            all work hard, live hard and save hard.

                            Lord Chalmers (Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 26–27)


                     The austerity agenda that was shared among the Brussels meeting’s
                     “specialists in financial disease” (Davis 1920) consisted of both a “diag-
                     nosis” and “a mode of treatment.” The diagnosis was harsh and evoked
                     a sense of dramatic emergency: the world economy was in severe crisis
                     and “the severity of the malady” varied immensely “in proportion to
                     the degree in which each nation has been immersed in the maelstrom
                     of the war” (Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 4).
                        The first ten days of the Brussels conference were devoted to hearing
                     the financial statements of the participating countries:

                        The examination of these statements brings out the extreme gravity of
                        the general situation of public finance throughout the world, and par-
                        ticularly in Europe. . . . Public opinion is largely responsible for this situ-
                        ation. . . . Nearly every Government is being pressed to incur fresh ex-
                        penditure; largely on palliatives which aggravate the very evils against
                        which they are directed. The first step is to bring public opinion in every
                        country to realise the essential facts of the situation and particularly the
                        need for re-establishing public finances on a sound basis as a prelimi-
                        nary to the execution of those social reforms which the world demands.
                        (Resolutions proposed by the Commission on Public Finance, Brussels
                        1920, vol. 1, 13, my italics)


                     After the presentation of empirical evidence of the financial predica-
                     ment, the conferences did not portray the causes of such evil as, say,
                     structural economic contradictions or the decision to wage a big, ex-
                     pensive war; rather, they laid the blame at the feet of the nations’ cit-
                     izens. Citizens were guilty of a desire to live above their means and


                     140




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   140        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     of pressuring governments to satisfy these “excessive” desires not just
                     through social measures, but through the subversion of the pillars of
                     capitalism. This, as the financier R. H. Brand put it, was a historical
                     paradox:

                        It is a paradox of the situation that, urgent as is this limitation of ex-
                        penditure on financial and economic grounds, the whole force of public
                        opinion still seems to be exerted in the opposite direction. The war has led
                        to an almost universal demand for the extension of Government func-
                        tions. Everyone has grown accustomed to State assistance and State ac-
                        tivity. Socialism and nationalism are the order of the day. The manual
                        workers . . . were encouraged to expect, and do expect, some new way
                        of life, some great betterment of their lot. These changes, they believe
                        can be achieved if the system of private industry is replaced by a sort
                        of Government or common ownership. They do not realize the hard
                        truth that . . . a better life can, owing to the losses of the war, be now
                        reached only through labour and suffering. (Verbatim Record, Brussels
                        1920, vol. 2, 20, my italics)


                     In the midst of this deeply troubling moment in which societies’ masses
                     sought more for themselves, the “hard truth” lay in their “mode of
                     treatment”: citizens’ behavior had to be shaped and controlled accord-
                     ing to the principles of economic science that would rehabilitate the
                     conditions of capital accumulation. Individuals had to work harder,
                     consume less, expect less from the government as a social actor, and
                     renounce any form of labor action that would impede the flow of pro-
                     duction. Lord Chalmers had stated it succinctly: “work hard, live hard,
                     save hard.”
                        Gerard Vissering of the Netherlands Central Bank, vice chairman
                     of the Commission of Currency and Exchange, well summed up the
                     austerity treatment: to assure economic recovery, “labour efficiency will
                     have to be increased, in the first place by avoiding strikes, but further
                     also by a more intensive supply of labour-service.” Moderation, too,
                     could serve to complement workers’ discipline. Economic recovery re-
                     quired “reducing the home-consumption to the strictly necessary and


                                                                                                       141




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   141        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     avoiding the superfluous, e.g., excessive consumption of butter, sugar,
                     etc.” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 61).
                        Hard work and economy—as in budget cuts and individual
                     abstinence—were the guiding principles that formed the essence of
                     austerity as a response to crisis. In themselves these were not much
                     of a novelty; they had been an integral part of the conceptual toolbox
                     of the renowned classical economists Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and
                     Thomas Robert Malthus for at least a century. What was new in the
                     early twentieth century was that the general public had seen the fault
                     in such narratives.
                        After World War I the general public was not going to accept aus-
                     tere economic “remedies,” and the technocrats in Brussels and Genoa
                     understood as much. Indeed, the economic experts intuited the wide-
                     spread challenge to traditional orthodox finances, especially among the
                     working people who were being seduced by “bolshevism.” The Econo-
                     mist spoke of the “revival of Marxism”; in his memo Gijsbert Weijer
                     Jan Bruins referred to “what may be called a certain postwar mentality
                     [ce qu’on pourrait appeler une certain mentalité d’après-guerre]” the
                     diffusion of which was “common knowledge,” while Pantaleoni de-
                     nounced how “public opinion is largely favourable to Socialism and
                     Paternalism” (Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 103). The inescapable confrontation
                     of technocrats with these realities of crisis deeply molded the nature
                     of modern austerity, which accordingly embodied two clear-headed
                     strategies—consensus and coercion.
                        The first strategy, consensus, entailed a conscious attempt to “in-
                     tensely awaken” (Pantaleoni in Brussels 1920, vol. 4, 107) the general
                     public to the scientific and necessary reforms toward economic stabili-
                     zation. The sense of alarm had to be spread, the right economic priori-
                     ties had to be understood. Such an impulse to “enlighten” is explicit in
                     many resolutions of the two conferences. For example, “[i]n order to
                     enlist public interest it is essential to give the greatest publicity possible
                     to the situation of the public finances of each State” (Resolution IX,
                     Commission on Public Finance, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 15). And again,
                     “All superfluous expenditure should be avoided. To attain this end the
                     enlightenment of public opinion is the most powerful lever” (Resolu-


                     142




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   142        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     tion VII, Commission on Currency and Exchange, Brussels 1920, vol. 1,
                     19, italics in original). Countries were urged to regularly collect budget-
                     ary information and any other suggestion that could be useful “for the
                     financial education of the public opinion of the world” (Resolution IX,
                     Commission on Public Finance, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 15).
                         In the same vein, the League of Nations had addressed the necessity
                     of “keeping expenditure within income,” balancing expenditure out of
                     revenue: “This principle must be clearly brought home to the peoples
                     of all countries; for it will be impossible otherwise to arouse them from
                     a dream of false hopes and illusions to the recognition of hard facts”
                     (Three months of the League of Nations, vol. 3, 1920, 77).
                         The second strategy, coercion, emerged out of the apprehension that
                     consensus might not be achieved or might not be sufficient. Democracy,
                     if necessary, would have to be bent in the pursuit of economic sound-
                     ness, and this process would be imposed. Pantaleoni—an architect of
                     austerity and later an adviser of Mussolini’s dictatorship—pointed out
                     “where Socialism is strong, where democracy is strong, public finance
                     will go the wrong way” (Brussels 1920, vol. 4, 109). Economic experts
                     seemingly did not trust the restless public to make the “correct” de-
                     cisions regarding its own well-being. As we will see, austerity carried
                     within it the principle of exempting economic policy decisions from
                     democratic procedures, either through technocratic institutions or, as
                     in the case of Italy, through a Fascist government. Austere economists
                     demonstrate the same anti-democratic intuitions to this day.
                         Coercion resided not only in how economic policies were passed,
                     but in how these policies worked. Technocrats devised monetary, fis-
                     cal, and industrial policies that imposed hard work and economy on a
                     population in need of discipline. After all, as the official proceedings of
                     the Brussels resolution pointed out, “[t]he country which accepts the
                     policy of budget deficits is treading the slippery path which leads to
                     general ruin; to escape from that path no sacrifice is too great” (Resolu-
                     tion II, Commission on Public Finance, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 13).
                         What follows is an examination of these recommendations as they
                     were presented in the Brussels resolutions of the Commission on
                     Public Finance and the Commission on Currency and Exchange; the


                                                                                                      143




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   143        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Commission on Finance at Genoa forcefully restated them, citing the
                     resolutions adopted by the prior conference “as basis for its own work”
                     (Medlicott et al., eds. 1974, vol. 19, 704). At both meetings, the partici-
                     pating nation-states unanimously endorsed these austerity principles.


                     Fiscal Austerity

                            Nations, like individuals, must earn their living and must pay their way.

                            Lord Chalmers (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 25)


                     The joint statement from the experts at Brussels left no doubt about
                     the European states’ new economic legislative priorities: “The equilib-
                     rium of State budgets must be restored” and “[f]loating debt should as
                     soon as practicable be funded” (Monetary Problems, Joint Statement
                     of Economic Experts, Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 2–3). The Genoa conference
                     repeated the refrain: “The most important reform of all must therefore
                     be the balancing of the annual expenditure of the State without the cre-
                     ation of fresh credits unrepresented by new assets” (Genoa Conference
                     1922, Report of the Second Commission [Finance], Resolution VII, in
                     Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 68–69).
                        This obsession with balancing the budget had the clear motive of
                     securing the conditions for capital accumulation. Indeed, Resolution II
                     was adamant that “[p]ublic attention should be especially drawn” to the
                     priority of increased production. Note that this production was to be
                     private: “the continual excess of Government expenditure over revenue
                     represented by budget deficits is one of the most serious obstacles to
                     such increase of production” (Commission on Public Finance, Resolu-
                     tion II, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 13).
                        The most urgent social and financial reform “on which all others
                     depend” was a broad budget cut, both in ordinary and extraordinary
                     public expenditure (Resolution III, ibid., 14). Resolution IV of the Brus-
                     sels conference emphasized that the first cut should be in armaments
                     and war expenditures. The following resolution pressed further: “The
                     Conference considers that every Government should abandon at the
                     earliest practicable date all uneconomical and artificial measures which


                     144




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   144        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     conceal from the people the true economic situation” (Resolution V, ibid.,
                     14). Such measures included welfare and social expenses, price controls
                     over primary goods such as “bread and other foodstuff,” unemploy-
                     ment benefits, and low transportation service fares and postal rates.
                     The resolutions condemned the existence of these policies as “wasteful”
                     and “extravagant” public expenditures and interferences with markets.
                         Indeed, fiscal austerity operated through two parallel logics. The
                     first was predominantly interested in safeguarding private ownership
                     of the means of production. During his discussion on public finance,
                     the Belgian prime minister and finance minister Léon Delacroix spoke
                     explicitly: “we must economise . . . we must avoid the adoption of so-
                     cial measures which might tend to thwart industry, and also the adop-
                     tion of such measures of nationalization and socialisation which might
                     substitute Government action to private enterprise” (Verbatim Record,
                     Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 22). The second logic sought to ensure that re-
                     sources would be shifted to the classes of society that could save and
                     invest. Indeed, in this framework savings were the sole driver of capital
                     accumulation and all savings would be automatically channeled into
                     investment—an assumption that the Keynesian framework of the 1930s
                     would later largely challenge.
                         By debunking the immediate connection between savings and in-
                     vestments, Keynes’s General Theory of 1936 (Keynes 1964) rehabilitated
                     public investment as a prerequisite for stable capital accumulation, not
                     as a hindrance to it. In the Keynesian framework, when the economy is
                     not at full employment, budget deficits actually boost private produc-
                     tion given that an increase in aggregate demand has a positive influence
                     on entrepreneurs’ profit expectations. In a nutshell, public investments
                     incentivize entrepreneurs to invest. However, before this, during the
                     critical red years after World War I, our austere economic experts—
                     including, notably, Keynes himself—had a graver concern: the defense
                     of capital as a social relation. Indeed, the existential prerequisite for any
                     investment was its security.
                         Cuts in welfare expenditures and social services increased the pool
                     of surplus, which could be used for private investment or paying back
                     government debt, which would in turn reward creditors (i.e., the virtu-


                                                                                                      145




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   145        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     ous savers in society). It follows that a state that utilized fiscal austerity
                     to reach budgetary equilibrium demonstrated its financial stability and
                     creditworthiness, and thus fostered savers’ confidence in its capacity
                     to uphold favorable conditions for capital accumulation. In the words
                     of Lord Chalmers: “without paying your way as a Nation, without get-
                     ting that equilibrium and stability which is at the basis of confidence,
                     there can be no hope whatsoever” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920,
                     vol. 2, 26).
                        The same logic of regressive redistribution from the bottom to the
                     top in order to promote capital accumulation also applied to the rev-
                     enue side. Increases in universal taxation contributed to a transfer of
                     wealth from the many to the few, under the guise of benefit for all.
                     Resolution VI of Brussels read, “fresh taxation must be imposed to
                     meet the deficit, and this process must be ruthlessly continued” (Reso-
                     lution VI, Commission on Public Finance, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 14). Of
                     course, there was a central caveat: taxation which “might be a burden
                     on private industry” (Delacroix, Belgian representative, Brussels 1920,
                     vol. 2, 22) was to be avoided. Most delegates at Brussels were skepti-
                     cal of a capital levy that would entail “leakage of capital” (Verbatim
                     Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 34) to other countries, hampering capital
                     accumulation. The intent was thus to hit the “general masses.” Like oth-
                     ers, the Swedish banker Oscar Rydbeck sang the praises of consump-
                     tion taxation (the quintessence of regressive taxation) as “a method of
                     taxing which directly promotes savings [of the popular masses],” since
                     “everyone who wants to buy an article on which he has to pay a certain
                     tax has to consider whether he can afford it or not, whether he can save
                     the expense or not” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 33).
                        The larger point was clear: a re-education of the general population,
                     which would learn the “virtue” of thrift. The Swedish banker Rydbeck
                     was adamant that his people had to cut back on their daily purchases:
                     “When speaking of saving, we must not forget that if saving is not ef-
                     fected by the general masses of the people, who at the present time
                     have come into possession of more money than they were accustomed
                     to, very little good will be done. In order to induce the broad masses



                     146




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   146        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     to save, indirect taxation must be introduced [pour forcer les masses
                     populaires à faire des économies, if faut recourir à la taxation indirecte]”
                     (ibid., 33).
                        Technocrats were well aware that, in a historical moment in which
                     the masses appeared hostile toward the old order of things, inducing
                     them to save was easier said than done. Alberto Beneduce, an Italian
                     professor of economic statistics and CEO of the National Institution of
                     Insurance (INA)—who would go on to have a lasting career as parlia-
                     mentarian, senator, and economic adviser of Mussolini’s regime—had
                     no doubt: it was necessary to “act upon public opinion, on the psycho-
                     logical state of the masses, so that they would no more impede but help
                     to re-establish the budget of the State” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920,
                     75, my italics). Beneduce gave voice to these preoccupations during the
                     plenary discussion of September 20, 1920. The date is significant: on
                     that day in his own country an unprecedented class struggle was at its
                     peak. The factory occupation had been going on for almost a month.
                     The “psychological state of the masses” seemed rather projected toward
                     a post-capitalist society where private ownership and wage relations
                     were to be abolished.
                        How could austerity proceed in such a turbulent time? Here again,
                     experts induced consensus through the persuasive powers of an “objec-
                     tive” economic science. Experts justified the necessity of fiscal auster-
                     ity by suggesting that social reforms were only “concealing from the
                     people the true economic situation” (Resolution V on Public Finance,
                     Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 14). Once again, we notice the “neutral” stand-
                     point taken by these experts whose purported role was to “inform” the
                     people—incapable of understanding on their own—of the “true” road
                     to economic redemption.
                        Where consensus failed, coercion was the substitute. Indeed, even
                     in cases where public opinion opposed these economic “truths,” the
                     beauty of budget cuts was such that, once set in motion, they secured
                     compliance anyway; the elimination of welfare programs imposed
                     thrift on the majority. Moreover, fiscal austerity meant that work-
                     ers were left to compete in the free market with no social safety net.



                                                                                                      147




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   147        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Thus, the survival instinct would kick in, killing strikes, bottling de-
                     mands for higher wages, and penalizing all manner of insubordinate
                     behavior.
                        In fact, the state—in its role as eliminator of expenditures—was a
                     fundamental precondition to reconstruct the material (and ideologi-
                     cal) conditions necessary for the divide between the economic and the
                     political domains to regain its hold. Clearly the very withdrawal of the
                     state from the realm of economic interventions was a drastic and hefty
                     political decision, but it was nonetheless justified as apolitical and eco-
                     nomically necessary—a process guided by technical reason, thus fun-
                     damentally uncontroversial.
                        To conclude, we have seen how fiscal austerity in the form of bud-
                     get cuts—especially welfare cuts—and regressive taxation enabled
                     the transfer of resources from the majority of citizens to the saving-
                     investing classes so as to secure property relations and greater capital
                     formation. Fiscal austerity also served another fundamental purpose:
                     to restore monetary stability and to secure the rule of technocratic
                     institutions.


                     Monetary Austerity

                     Inflation and Dear Money

                            The essential requisite for the economic reconstruction of Europe is the
                            achievement by each country of stability in the value of its currency.

                            Genoa Conference 1922, Resolution 1 of the Second Commission
                            (Finance) (in Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 68)


                     A stable means of monetary exchange is a precondition for efficient
                     market transactions and investment. The experts at the Brussels and
                     Genoa conferences argued that “[i]t is not sufficient for trade and
                     industry merely to have capital. They require stable prices, stable ex-
                     changes, stability of the internal and external financial mechanism”
                     (R. H. Brand, Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 17). The currency
                     commissions of the two conferences set out to defeat inflation: “It is


                     148




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   148        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     essential that the inflation of credit and currency should be stopped
                     everywhere at the earliest possible moment” (Monetary Problems: joint
                     statement of economic experts, Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 2).
                         Economic experts at the two conferences defined inflation as an “ar-
                     tificial and unrestrained expansion of the currency” that had the effect
                     of reducing the currency’s purchasing power per unit. Inflation “de-
                     based the currency,” and its degeneration could be monstrous: to buy
                     the same goods at higher prices, one needed additional currency, which
                     was procured by further “inflation,” thereby creating a “vicious spiral”
                     of “constantly rising prices and wages, and constantly increasing infla-
                     tion” (Recommendations of the Conference, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 9).
                         Inflation was diagnosed as a pernicious outcome of war collectivism:
                     i.e., of state interference with the “natural” laws of supply and demand.
                     The wartime politicization of the economic domain was characterized
                     as the main catalyst for inflation, especially its consequent rise in wages
                     and production costs, all of which hindered capital accumulation. “It is
                     generally recognized that continued inflation, which is primarily due
                     to excessive Government expenditure, has a serious effect on produc-
                     tion,” noted R. H. Brand (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 17).
                     It followed that fiscal austerity was a primary remedy for inflation,
                     since—in the framing of the conference experts—budget deficits forced
                     governments to finance their expenditures by issuing either more paper
                     currency or fresh credit, thereby increasing the amount of legal tender
                     in circulation.
                         The Genoa proceedings relied heavily on one of Hawtrey’s insights:
                     that budget cuts were indispensable to check the consumption not only
                     of the state but also of the general public. In effect, Hawtrey’s principle
                     reduced the disposable income of the working classes. This amounted
                     to a check on public demand, which lowered and stabilized internal
                     prices while also securing external monetary stability, since a reduction
                     in both government and private outlay discouraged imports and thus
                     improved the balance of payments.
                         To defeat inflation and to fully rein in the purchasing power of
                     workers, fiscal austerity was to be supplemented by monetary auster-
                     ity. The latter meant a direct and deliberate credit contraction through


                                                                                                      149




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   149        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     an increase in interest rates, which would deflate prices and in turn
                     boost confidence in the value of the currency. This was the core of the
                     so-called policy of “dear money” (Resolution VII, Commission on
                     Currency and Exchange, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 19). Vissering declared:
                     “the purchasing power of money [can], by way of remedy, be forced up
                     somewhat by making money scarce” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920,
                     vol. 2, 45).
                        Like fiscal austerity, monetary austerity fundamentally worked to
                     shape the behavior of economic agents in a way that was favorable to
                     capital accumulation. If depreciation “leads to a spirit of reckless ex-
                     travagance and a determination to spend at once what in any case is
                     likely to be lost” (R. H. Brand, Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2,
                     18), then revaluation incentivized savings—the most virtuous eco-
                     nomic behavior—on the part of those who have the means to save. The
                     former governor of the Bank of England, Brien Cokayne, under his
                     new title as first Baron Cullen of Ashbourne, sat as a member of the
                     Commission on Currency and Exchange. He was adamant that “the last
                     rise in money rates in Great Britain appears to have acted, as it natu-
                     rally should, as a considerable stimulus to thrift. Bankers now receive
                     numerous enquiries as to the terms on which they will accept deposits
                     now that rates are so high” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 71).
                        The experts were aware that, along with fiscal austerity, the addi-
                     tion of a “dear money policy” would be extremely unpopular. Monetary
                     austerity had the same purpose of promoting savers at the cost of the
                     rest of society, especially the working classes. The deflation that ensued
                     would mean that public borrowing for social expenditures would be-
                     come costlier and that, more destructively, wages would be curtailed.
                     Dear money, after all, produced a rise in unemployment that mitigated
                     labor’s bargaining power and its capacity to resist wage cuts. Accord-
                     ingly, credit contraction produced unemployment, which slowed down
                     the domestic economy and made countries less competitive abroad
                     (due to monetary revaluation), which further exacerbated the eco-
                     nomic downturn. As Henry Strakosch of the South African delegation
                     put it, dear money equaled “hard times and unemployment” (Verbatim
                     Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 78).


                     150




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   150        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                        The negative, inequitable repercussions of deflation were both
                     known and heavily criticized, especially in Britain, where the public
                     had already begun gnashing its teeth. The British New Statesman maga-
                     zine regularly denounced its effects, in particular how in the midst of
                     deflation “the only people who benefit are rentiers and creditors, whose
                     money incomes grow steadily more valuable as prices fall.”

                     Achieving Political Immunity and Reconfiguring
                     the Relations of Production

                     The experts who convened in Brussels and Genoa faced a practi-
                     cal problem: how do you design policies (i.e., ensure their unfettered
                     function and entrenchment) that run so counter to public interest and
                     sentiment? The solution was immediately coercive. Experts pressed to
                     use technocratic power—as justified by the purity of science—to en-
                     force the depoliticization of economic institutions and decisions. For
                     the Baron Cullen of Ashbourne, the path forward depended on “plac-
                     ing the issue of paper currency outside the direct control of the State”
                     (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 71). Vissering elaborated: “A
                     national or municipal government might possibly be powerless against
                     such pressure on the part of the employees, because the latter can make
                     their political influence felt on the national government.” On the other
                     hand, “[a]n independent banking institution need not however allow
                     itself to be led by the nose by any power whatsoever exercised by the
                     employees” (ibid., 57).
                         These political strategies of depoliticization were embodied in the
                     official resolutions of the two conferences. They asserted the necessity
                     for banks, in particular central banks, to be independent technocratic
                     bodies—“freed from political pressures”—in order to guarantee that
                     they “should be conducted solely on the lines of prudent finance” (Reso-
                     lution III, Commission on Currency and Exchange, Brussels 1920, vol.
                     1, 18, italics in original; and Resolution II of the Report of the Second
                     Commission [Finance], Genoa, in Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 68).
                     With this intention, “in countries where there is no central bank of is-
                     sue, one should be established” (Resolution II, Genoa, in Gordon and


                                                                                                      151




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   151        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Montpetit 1922, 68). Moreover, at Genoa it was made explicit that cen-
                     tral banks would enjoy absolute discretionary powers, since “the dis-
                     cretion of the central banks” should not be “fettered by any definite
                     rules” (Resolution XI, Report of the Second Commission [Finance], in
                     Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 70).
                         In other words, the power of monetary management that the war
                     had dislodged from technocratic hold could not rest in the hands of the
                     representatives of the people, who would likely be more sensitive to so-
                     cial concerns; rather, it would rest in the hands of technocrats who had
                     as their priority the rehabilitation of the purity of capital accumulation,
                     a priority unfettered by any other preoccupation.
                         In this light, the fixation with reasserting the gold standard, which
                     was loudly announced at Genoa, was primarily explainable as a po-
                     litical buffer to protect the primacy of economic conventions over “the
                     community in its collective capacity” (Resolution IV of the Commis-
                     sion on Currency and Exchange, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 18). Of course, a
                     return to gold was deemed necessary for international monetary stabil-
                     ity. But more important still, the gold standard would force govern-
                     ments to accept the necessity and inevitability of both monetary and
                     fiscal austerity.
                         In the first place, going back to and maintaining the gold standard
                     ensured a constant justification of the deflationary choices of central
                     banks. Indeed, even once the gold standard was achieved, the cen-
                     tral banks could operate with the exclusive intention of maintaining
                     gold parity. Monetary austerity—in the form of increasing the rate of
                     interest—was the main tool used to avoid gold flights. A gold standard
                     regime was also, by definition, a fiscal austerity regime in which public
                     expenditure was to be kept at a bare minimum. Reforms would no lon-
                     ger be a matter of political dispute, but of economic necessity: to avoid
                     gold flight, domestic consumption and imports had to be minimized.
                     Thus, the gold standard was an object of fixation for experts. It enforced
                     austerity, and with it, proper capitalist class relations.
                         At least notionally, these same economists regarded fears of violent
                     deflation and the economic downturn that could result as the price to
                     pay to go back to gold. These risks were insufficient to forgo such a


                     152




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   152        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     “painful treatment” (Baron Cullen, Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920,
                     vol. 2, 70); the goal was too important. Tellingly, experts’ awareness
                     of deflation’s likely burdens on the community—concretely mani-
                     fested in the 1921 British deflationary crisis—did not dissuade them
                     from recommending deflation at Genoa. To them the suffering that
                     came with returning to the gold standard was justified as a matter of
                     “general interest” (Genoa Conference, Resolution 6, in Gordon and
                     Montpetit 1922, 68).
                         In sum, monetary austerity and fiscal austerity were two sides of the
                     same coin that worked in a reciprocal fashion. British Treasury official
                     Sir Otto Niemeyer summarized this clearly when he advised the Bra-
                     zilian government, in his capacity as executive director of the Bank of
                     England: “The two factors, budget equilibrium and stable money, must
                     march together; and neither one can be maintained without the other”
                     (Niemeyer 1931, 4). Indeed, we have seen how budgetary orthodoxy
                     was a prerequisite for the revaluation of currency. At the same time,
                     deflationary monetary policy—in the form of rising interest rates and
                     the curtailment of money supply—increased the cost for the govern-
                     ment to borrow, thus limiting its expansionary projects. Resolution VII
                     of the Brussels Commission on Currency and Exchange was explicit:
                     “If the wise control of credit brings dear money, this result will in itself
                     help to promote economy” (Resolution VII, Commission on Currency
                     and Exchange, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 19).
                         Not only did the two mutually reinforce one another, they also stood
                     for the same purpose. Fiscal and monetary austerity favored wealthy
                     savers while the rest of society was forced to consume less via dimi-
                     nution of government resources, payment of taxes, and lower wages.
                     The dual operation of fiscal and monetary austerity put the burden of
                     capital accumulation on the working classes to ultimately reestablish
                     the divide between the economic and the political and protect private
                     property and wage relations. Most importantly, these policies robbed
                     the people of all economic agency, and silenced their demands for
                     higher wages and social redistribution, not to mention their demands
                     for nationalization and alternative relations of production.
                         If one digs deeper, it is easy to see how, disguised as a monetary


                                                                                                      153




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   153        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     phenomenon, the vilification of inflation was aimed at shoring up the
                     capitalist social relations of production, especially through notions of
                     decreased consumption and increased production. This was explicitly
                     stated in the resolution of the Brussels Commission on Currency and
                     Exchange reproduced below. Indeed the second austerity motto, cen-
                     tered on “hard work,” was an indispensable condition for the final res-
                     cue of capital accumulation. It is the topic of the next section.


                     Industrial Austerity

                            The complementary steps for arresting the increase of inflation by increas-
                            ing the wealth on which the currency is based, may be summed up in the
                            words: increased production and decreased consumption. The most intensive
                            production possible is required in order to make good the waste of war and
                            arrest inflation and thus to reduce the cost of living; yet we are witnessing in
                            many countries production below the normal, together with those frequent
                            strikes which aggravate instead of helping to cure the present shortage and
                            dearness of commodities. . . . Yet in our opinion the production of wealth
                            is in many countries suffering from a cause which it is more directly in the
                            power of Governments to remove, viz., the control in various forms which
                            was often imposed by them as a war measure and has not yet been com-
                            pletely relaxed. In some cases business has even been taken by Governments
                            out of the hands of the private trader, whose enterprise and experience are
                            a far more potent instrument for the recuperation of the country. Another
                            urgent need is the freest possible international exchange of commodities.

                            Resolution V, Commission on Currency and Exchange (Brussels 1920,
                            vol. 1, 19)


                     So far, we have emphasized that the primary goal of austerity, as for-
                     mulated by the experts of the two international conferences, was the
                     resumption of capital accumulation. To this end, both fiscal and mon-
                     etary policies diminished the consumption of the many and increased
                     the saving and investment of the few, while also reestablishing the di-
                     vide between the economic and the political sectors that would reset
                     capitalism’s pillars.
                        These efforts would be moot if the production process was ham-
                     pered; “the principal need of Europe is a resumption of work and pro-
                     duction” (Monetary Problems, Joint statement of economic experts,



                     154




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   154        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 2). But it wasn’t just an increase in production
                     that the experts were aiming at; they sought production under rein-
                     stated capitalist relations of exploitation, which in no other moment of
                     history had been so gravely challenged. And as Resolution V, quoted
                     above, illustrates, in order to secure the stability of money, the funda-
                     mental pillars of wage relations and private property also needed to be
                     reinforced.
                         Resolution V explicitly states that capitalist production required
                     the elimination of any aspirations of the working people for alterna-
                     tive organizations of production. Such aspirations could be thwarted
                     through two measures: privatization and the control of labor. The two
                     would ultimately guard against the fundamental culprits of economic
                     crisis—the wrong actions of governments and of individuals (or bet-
                     ter, of employees). Vissering, praised for his “high scientific and practi-
                     cal competence” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 83), asserted
                     that “depreciation of money is not a cause in itself,” but “is only the ef-
                     fect of other causes, and that these other causes are to be found in the
                     acts of national and municipal governments on the one hand, and in
                     the acts of individuals, more particularly employees, on the other.” He
                     concluded that “[o]nly when both governments and citizens arrive at
                     more reasonable actions can other measures be properly applied with a
                     view to attaining better conditions in the monetary system” (ibid., 51).
                         Notwithstanding the prima facie interpretation of inflation as a
                     monetary phenomenon, economists made clear that, beneath it, the
                     solution was about subordination of the citizens to capitalism. These
                     thoughts were coherent with a deep-seated fear about the political con-
                     sequences of inflation. Keynes, the economist who at that time advo-
                     cated for harsh dear money, used words that are by now famous: “a
                     continuance of inflationism and high prices will not only depress the
                     exchanges but by their effect on prices will strike at the whole basis of
                     contract, of security, and of the capitalist system generally.” In a similar
                     vein, the Italian economist Luigi Einaudi wrote: “what appeared to pro-
                     foundly shake the entire society and prepare a social revolution . . . was
                     called with a technical word monetary inflation” (Einaudi 1933, 337).



                                                                                                      155




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   155        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity




                     Privatization and the Crowding-Out Argument

                     The policy change advocated for by austerity economists was one that
                     “diminish[ed] the sphere of government” (Verbatim Record, Brussels
                     1920, vol. 2, 20). Such “sound policy” would “allow the natural eco-
                     nomic laws to have full possibly of acting in all their intensity” (Ben-
                     educe, ibid., 73), thus leading to “sound finances” (ibid., 142) and espe-
                     cially to a boost in the efficiency of production.
                        To sell their recipes, the austerity advocates leaned heavily on a
                     “crowding out” argument—a battle horse of the British Treasury—
                     that the British delegates shared during the conference discussions:
                     “Since there is not enough capital to go round, which is to have it—
                     governments or private industry? . . . The more capital is absorbed by
                     Governments, the less is available for private industry. . . . Which is
                     likely to use capital more productively, Governments or private indus-
                     try? The answer is in favor of private industry” (ibid., 17).
                        A memorandum from the Italian professor Pantaleoni bolstered
                     this view by violently attacking “state socialism.” Governments had to
                     stop their interference and stick more closely “to their proper business,
                     which is to furnish the general conditions for unfettered private activ-
                     ity” (Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 103).
                        It is useful to pause here and contrast these perspectives with those
                     depicted in the first chapters of this book. The lessons of World War I
                     were so compelling that they pushed many bureaucrats, social and eco-
                     nomic experts, and of course workers to break away from the dogmas
                     of laissez-faire capitalism and promote the productive superiority of
                     state control and forms of central planning. “A wholly new school of
                     thought” was “laying hold of people,” as Viscount Haldane had com-
                     mented. In his 1920 book The Triumph of Nationalization, the econ-
                     omist Leo Chiozza Money exposed the irrationality of “doctrinaire
                     individualism,” while his colleagues on the Sankey committee put
                     private property on public trial on the grounds that it was “wasteful”
                     and “antisocial.”
                        By putting the capitalist resolutions of the conferences into this con-


                     156




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   156        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     text, it is clear that the technocrats in attendance were not expressing
                     objective truths, as they purported, but were instead defending private
                     property to the hilt. Indeed, the return of private enterprise’s primacy
                     had stakes that were much higher than the mere objective of produc-
                     tive efficiency: the return of privatization was about the depoliticiza-
                     tion of the economy, which would bring the aspirations of the working
                     classes away from alternative social organizations and back into the
                     boundaries of capitalist production. In other words, if the production
                     for profit were to prevail over production for use, privatization had to
                     be made safe.

                     Disciplining Labor and Cutting Wages

                     Privatization was meaningless if not accompanied by the “cooperative”
                     behavior of those who were expected to labor within the capital order.
                     As such, the unprecedented industrial mobilization of the interwar pe-
                     riod would have sent a chill down experts’ spines: instead of working
                     hard for increased production, a great number of workers were doing
                     the exact opposite. Vissering voiced concern: “They demand shorter
                     working hours, without correspondingly improving their work which
                     would permit of intenser production,” and in order to enforce these
                     demands “they moreover frequently strike, which means a fresh drop
                     in production” (Verbatim Record, Brussels 1920, vol. 2, 50). He further
                     suggested that the hours of lost labor “represent a value of hundreds of
                     millions, if not milliards, in money” (ibid.). Critiques of labor disputes
                     went together with chastising the generalized work ethic: “And even
                     where they do work, many of them exhibit a kind of work-shyness so
                     that their efficiency is thereby again reduced. This in turn again leads to
                     decreased production and increased cost of goods” (ibid.).
                        Maffeo Pantaleoni used even harsher terms, denouncing workers
                     as violent, dishonest, and blackmailers of government. The shortening
                     hours of work reflected the leisurely, “pipe-in-mouth way” in which
                     work was done (Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 106). Here Pantaleoni expressed
                     no doubts: “wages are much higher than their marginal productivity of
                     labour,” and the culprits were the “laws and government actions” that


                                                                                                      157




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   157        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     acted “first under the stress of war, then under the stress of Socialism
                     and Bolshevism” (ibid.).
                        If one could not convince the majority to work hard (while con-
                     suming less), the experts knew that the depoliticization of the economy
                     would get them to submit. Indeed, the agenda was to remove “controls
                     in various forms,” including laws that protected labor. The reestablish-
                     ment of an unfettered labor market, especially in times of deflation,
                     warranted a natural disciplining of the labor force through a threat of
                     ending up in the ranks of the reserve army of labor if they refused to
                     accept lower wages. As we shall see in chapter 7, the assembly of Italian
                     academics went so far as to justify explicitly repressive labor laws under
                     a Fascist regime in order to guarantee the ultimate austerity objective
                     of hard work.

                     Conclusion

                     Viewed through a lens of capitalist crisis, the financial conferences of
                     Brussels and Genoa are neither irrelevant nor unsuccessful, as some
                     have characterized them. They actually represent a landmark moment
                     within the history of capitalism: the emergence of austerity in its mod-
                     ern form, as a global technocratic project.
                        Austerity as it is known today was an offspring of crisis—not merely
                     economic crisis, but crisis of capitalism as a socioeconomic system. The
                     preceding chapters have shown that after the war, for the first time,
                     the challenge to the pillars of capitalist accumulation became a mass
                     phenomenon. The working classes acquired a sense of entitlement and
                     participated as protagonists in the political scene. In the minds of the
                     people, private ownership in the means of production and wage rela-
                     tions were no longer natural, indisputable givens.
                        In that moment, unlike ever before, capital required protection. This
                     is what the experts at the conferences set themselves to do: their ulti-
                     mate objective was to secure the reproduction of the capitalist system.
                        The conferences diagnosed the cause of the crisis as the individuals
                     who were contesting the system and were responsible for its breakdown.
                     These individuals demonstrated excessive consumption combined with


                     158




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   158        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                     international technocrats and the making of austerity


                     an unwillingness to work productively at low wages. Inflation and bud-
                     get deficits, the two great evils of the time, were nothing more than
                     symptoms of a much deeper “flaw”: individual behavior.
                        Hence, the experts forged the drastic cure of austerity: a doctrine of
                     economy and hard work, ostensibly for the good of nations (or at least
                     their economies). As framed, austerity was about individual sacrifice
                     on the part of “patriotic” citizens who had to practice frugality in life-
                     style and discipline in labor. Half a century later, in 1979, the powerful
                     Chair of the American Federal Reserve, Paul Volcker, used the same
                     mantra to tackle another great crisis: “the American standard of liv-
                     ing must decline” (Rattner 1979), he announced, while supporting the
                     government’s firm resolve to break strikes and delivering on a shocking
                     dosage of dear money.
                        The closing resolution of the Brussels commission on public finance
                     encapsulates the repressive nature of the austerity project that still reso-
                     nates today:

                        The Conference is of opinion that the strict application of the principles
                        outlined above is the necessary condition for the re-establishment of
                        public finances on a sound basis. A country which does not contrive as
                        soon as possible to attain the execution of these principles is doomed
                        beyond hope of recovery. To enable Governments, however, to give ef-
                        fect to these principles, all classes of the community must contribute
                        their share. . . . Above all, to fill up the gap between the supply of, and
                        the demand for, commodities, it is the duty of every patriotic citizen to
                        practi[c]e the strictest possible economy and so to contribute his maxi-
                        mum effort to the common weal. Such private action is the indispens-
                        able basis for the fiscal measures required to restore public finances.
                        (Resolution X, Commission on Public Finance, Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 15–
                        16, my italics)


                     In such a turbulent moment, the application of the austerity principles
                     required an emphatic justification. One of the most novel aspects of
                     modern austerity was that, as an antidote to capitalist crisis, it could no
                     longer dismiss or disregard the actors that were deemed responsible for


                                                                                                      159




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   159        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     that very crisis. Experts had to deal with public opinion, either through
                     consensus or through coercion—or, most practically, through both.
                     This constituted the dual strategy of austerity.
                        Austerity sought consensus through the sponsorship and intellectual
                     authority of technocracy, which operated as both its epistemic ground-
                     ing and its political force. As preachers of “pure economic science,” ex-
                     perts imparted their teachings to all citizens. They set out to educate the
                     general public about the truthfulness of the prescriptions upon which
                     their economic behavior should be shaped. Once disarmed of any
                     agency to advance economic alternatives, the people had no choice but
                     to either comply or be forced to comply with the economic necessity.
                     And once the economic/political divide was reestablished, the coercive
                     market forces would naturally work to discipline disarmed workers.
                        Austerity proved to be more than just wishful thinking on the part
                     of the experts at the international conferences of Brussels and Genoa.
                     Chapters 6 and 7 will investigate how these experts successfully imple-
                     mented the international code of austerity. We will begin by looking at
                     Britain, a country that pioneered austerity starting in 1920, then explore
                     how, starting in 1922, Mussolini’s Italy painstakingly followed in those
                     footsteps. That these dates are so close to the two international confer-
                     ences (Brussels and Genoa) is telling of the rapid ascent of austerity
                     across Europe.




                     160




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   160        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 6

                     Austerity, a British Story




                            Increased production, cessation of Government borrowings, and decreased
                            expenditure both by the Government and by each individual member of the
                            nation are the first essentials to recovery.

                            HMSO, Final Report of the Committee on Currency and Foreign Exchange
                            (1919c, 3)



                     Even before the principles of austerity were codified in Brussels and
                     Genoa beginning in 1920, its component policies were already spread-
                     ing. This was particularly the case in Britain, which at the time was
                     the most advanced capitalist country in Europe. Faced with rising
                     labor mobilization and rising prices, the country adopted two public
                     axioms—produce more, consume less—that served to smother any
                     rays of hope for a reconstructionist program, to say nothing of a non-
                     capitalist future.
                         As a governmental matter, this campaign began with the 1918 con-
                     vening of the Committee on Currency and Foreign Exchange (or Cun-
                     liffe Committee, named after the lord who chaired it), which gathered
                     experts from the Treasury, academia, and the Bank of England to dis-
                     cuss ways to combat the “uncertainty of the monetary situation” in the
                     reconstruction period and formulate an agenda that became an intel-
                     lectual predecessor to the Brussels and Genoa outputs that followed.
                     This chapter’s opening epigraph speaks to the committee’s perception


                                                                                                      161




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   161        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     of a soaring capitalist crisis, along with the now familiar imperatives
                     (“increase production” and “decrease expenditure”).
                         Notable in this early iteration of British austerity was its demand
                     for extreme sacrifice; even personal consumption of the most basic of
                     commodities like bread was secondary “to the interests of economy.”
                     Chancellor Austen Chamberlain’s thoughts on the bread subsidy reveal
                     where the priorities of austerity stood: “There is £45,000,000 for the
                     bread subsidy. Nothing would give me greater satisfaction than to deal
                     with that . . . the sooner we get rid of these subsidies the better. I agree
                     that they conduce to conceal the real facts of the situation from the
                     country and that they put a most onerous burden upon the State and
                     on the national finances . . . the sooner they are got rid of the better.”
                         Beginning in spring 1920, harsh monetary deflation took a toll on
                     British employment. Fiscal and industrial austerity quickly followed,
                     with unprecedented cuts, regressive taxation, privatization, and repres-
                     sive measures to control workers’ direct action.
                         By 1922 money wages in industry were a third of their 1920 levels.
                     By 1926 the austere British state denounced labor militancy, buried wel-
                     fare resources, and restored the gold standard, with the pound back
                     at its prewar parity. Now just a few years removed from the war, the
                     sentiments of collectivism and its purported “wholly new school of
                     thought” had been relegated to the archives of history.
                         It was a handful of Treasury officials who played a crucial role in
                     orchestrating this turn of events—a turn that had been unimaginable
                     in the immediate aftermath of the Great War. In their role as controllers
                     of finance during the turbulent postwar years, Basil Blackett and Otto
                     Niemeyer had the largest sway over the chancellor of the exchequer, the
                     head of the Treasury. They did not have to worry about political reelec-
                     tion, and their names were not under the public eye; thus these experts
                     could act behind the scenes to shape and rationalize austerity.
                         Still, the job was no piece of cake: the political circumstances could
                     not have been more unfavorable. As we know from earlier chapters, the
                     war duress had politicized citizens. For the majority, economic sacrifice
                     was a relic of the war; the country, it was largely thought, had “entered
                     an entirely new epoch” of social redistribution and economic collectiv-


                     162




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   162        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     ism (Dawson 1917, 7). In this uneasy context austerity had to thump its
                     way forward under the guise of its proclaimed sound economic theory.
                     Ralph Hawtrey—the in-house Treasury economist and a pioneer in
                     macroeconomic theory—provided just such a theoretical grounding.
                         Hawtrey modeled the economy as a great credit machine, and he
                     understood inflation, i.e., the expansion of credit, as an insidious threat
                     to the economy. As he vividly put it, “[i]nflation is a deadly blight; once
                     it has gained a hold, it will poison the whole economic system, and can
                     only be eliminated, if at all, at the cost of exhausting efforts” (Hawtrey
                     1923, 230). To Hawtrey, credit stabilization required constant monetary
                     management; it was not going to stabilize on its own. The key to such
                     management was to control—or better, to subjugate—the consumer.
                         It is easy to overlook—as the canonical literature does—the classist
                     nature of a seemingly apolitical over-consumptionist model. Indeed,
                     part of the construction of consensus and coercion around austerity
                     rested in expelling class awareness from economic theory, even while
                     terrorizing certain classes. Looking closer, these economic theories re-
                     introduce class differences through the back door when they under-
                     stand that not all consumers are equally virtuous. For the experts it
                     was the unproductive consumer, i.e., the worker, who required control,
                     while the productive consumer, i.e., the creditor/investor, required re-
                     ward. The austerity policies that the experts envisioned were thus an
                     essential instrument of forced redistribution in favor of the savers-
                     investors and against the low-income, low-saving working class. This
                     was the recipe for stabilizing money, increasing private capital, and
                     normalizing wage relations.
                         Austerity was most certainly a political project, but its assumptions
                     weren’t necessarily wrong. Indeed, it laid bare an undeniable truth: for
                     capitalism to function, workers had to be disciplined into accepting the
                     two pillars of capital accumulation—the primacy of private property
                     and wage relations.
                         These core principles of austerity double as the assumptions under-
                     lying today’s mainstream economic theory, especially its tendency to
                     serve political ends. This can be seen extensively in Hawtreyan theory,
                     which experimented with many of the social abstractions that are typi-


                                                                                                      163




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   163        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     cal of today’s standard economic theory. In the preface of his most in-
                     fluential work, Currency and Credit, Hawtrey expressed grave concerns
                     regarding the epochal changes he was witnessing. Prewar institutions
                     were largely understood as “things of the past” (Hawtrey 1919a, Preface,
                     vi). To him, “[t]here never was a time at which the currency systems of
                     the world were so exposed to danger as they are likely to be in the im-
                     mediate future” (ibid., 363). Apart from his clear distress over a devia-
                     tion from the “normal” that was codified in his theories, Hawtrey’s em-
                     beddedness in class struggle is revealed by his silent class bias and his
                     clear-cut technocratic (anti-democratic) resolution to the crisis. Such
                     an agenda, best embodied by his prescription of independent central
                     banks (i.e., exempt from democratic pressures), soon became the com-
                     mon ploy of the British establishment.
                         The austerity experts’ overarching goal was to bulwark economic re-
                     lations from the influences of politics and state intervention; in doing
                     so they both exempted economic policies from democratic decision-
                     making and cast economic theory as apolitical. Of course, to conceive
                     economic theory as apolitical required an unfettered market that
                     was influenced only by its objective laws—a feat that, in a moment
                     of public fervor, could only be achieved by shielding economic deci-
                     sions from the general public. Indeed, the nature of depoliticization
                     and the close interconnection of its three main features (i.e., removing
                     the state from economic relations; removing economic policies from
                     democratic decision-making; and understanding economic theory as
                     apolitical) highlight how austerity—even in a parliamentary democracy
                     like Britain—was essentially anti-democratic in nature. If we combine
                     this characteristic of austerity with its main prescription—subduing the
                     working classes into producing more and consuming less—we can eas-
                     ily say that austerity was (and still is) an outright repressive project.
                         Such repression required a team. What follows is an introduction to
                     the characters and levers who facilitated it, stitching together austerity
                     policies (in their threefold form of fiscal, industrial, and monetary) and
                     the economic theory that molded and rationalized them. The telling
                     of this story is based on a study of both Treasury policy memoranda
                     (most of which had been unmined in the economic or historical litera-


                     164




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   164        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     ture) and Hawtrey’s published and theoretical contributions from the
                     period. These sources tell a story that to date has not been told: how a
                     tight connection between the theories of monetary management and
                     the urge to shape individual behavior was conceived and built to last.
                     To achieve these ends, a campaign for an independent central bank
                     (another story that has escaped scholarly attention but is in fact in-
                     dispensable to understanding the nature of austerity to this day) was
                     essential.

                     Technocrats at the Helm of Power

                     After World War I, the British Treasury had risen in stature and
                     came to be considered the central department of British government.
                     Its powers as a department were embodied by the outsized personal
                     sway of two civil servants, Sir Basil P. Blackett and Sir Otto Niemeyer.
                     These two experts were the principal direct advisors to the chancel-
                     lor of the exchequer on all financial matters, including taxation, debt
                     management, and domestic and international monetary policy. Their
                     department of finance prepared the annual budget and often wrote the
                     budget speeches for the chancellor himself. Blackett vividly described
                     his almost ubiquitous role: “the day-to-day work of the . . . Depart-
                     ment . . . involves the assumption of responsibilities by the Controller
                     of Finance which, when he makes the mistake of turning [his] mind
                     to consider their magnitude, are really staggering” (August 17, 1921,
                     T 199/3, fol. 133349).
                         All relations between the Treasury, the Bank of England, and the
                     money market were in the controller’s hands. Blackett and Niemeyer
                     were both in direct and personal contact with the Bank’s powerful
                     governor, Montagu Norman (who held the office from 1920 to 1944),
                     and Niemeyer was even Norman’s close friend (Sayers 1976). After the
                     war, the Bank of England and the Treasury shared monetary authority.
                     With the large amount of Treasury bills in circulation until the spring
                     of 1921, the Bank of England was dependent on the Treasury in order to
                     raise the Bank rate (see Howson 1975, 10).
                         These “neutral” economic experts came from the high echelons


                                                                                                      165




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   165        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     of society. Hailing from upper-middle-class families, they were edu-
                     cated in the prestigious halls of Oxford, where they were taught about
                     society—though notably not economics—through a lens of “national
                     interest.” Placing first in the civil service examinations (in 1904 and
                     1906, respectively), the two immediately secured posts at the Treasury
                     and began long careers. Blackett became controller of finance in 1920;
                     Niemeyer, his deputy, succeeded him in 1922 and held the post for the
                     ensuing five years.
                        The controllers’ was a technocratic form of power. Their profound
                     clout and decision-making leeway over policy making came with their
                     position as permanent senior officials, insulated from the pressures
                     that come with universal suffrage and political competition. Until 1925,
                     Blackett and Niemeyer were more influential than the chancellor him-
                     self, who was usually in office for a very short period and was generally
                     not a financial expert (Peden 2000, 136–37). This remained true even
                     with a heavyweight like Churchill in office. A 1927 note by the governor
                     of the Bank of France, Emile Moreau, referred to the opinion of the
                     French ambassador in London: “He points out that Winston Churchill,
                     who detests [French Prime Minister] Poincaré, isn’t really in control of
                     the Treasury. The man who does in fact control it is Sir Otto Niemeyer,
                     the intimate friend of M. Norman” (Boyle 1968, 229).
                        The influence of the two experts extended later in their careers to
                     the Bank of England. Both Niemeyer and Blackett were recruited by
                     Governor Norman to high posts; Blackett was a director at the Bank
                     from 1929 until his death in 1935; Niemeyer was first executive director
                     and advisor to the governor (1927–1938), and then, for a long tenure, a
                     director of the Bank (1938–1952).
                        Most importantly, their political impact extended well beyond
                     national borders: the two technocrats devised austerity reforms that
                     spread to many other countries. Both were members of the financial
                     committee of the League of Nations and worked to implement the post-
                     war financial reconstruction plans for Austria, Bulgaria, and Greece.
                     The schemes made international loans conditional upon efforts to
                     balance the budget, to stabilize the currency, and especially to create




                     166




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   166        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     private central banks, independent of government—all central tenets
                     of austerity.
                        Blackett pressed his hand particularly on the global East. As finance
                     member of the Viceroy Executive Council in India (1922–1928), he
                     pushed his austerity mandate by getting the colony to fund its float-
                     ing debt, balance its budget, cut expenditures (especially in the railway
                     system), stabilize the exchange rate, establish an independent central
                     bank, and attain gold parity. Niemeyer advocated the same types of
                     measures in his missions as a financial expert in Australia (1930), Brazil
                     (1931), and Argentina (1933).
                        Certainly, the two experts were no outliers relative to the history
                     of the British Treasury: since the Victorian era, budgetary orthodoxy
                     and monetary rigor had represented the uncontested doctrine of the
                     department. Yet, given the unprecedented climate following World
                     War I, Blackett’s and Niemeyer’s influence during this period lends
                     them special relevance to the evolution of modern-day austerity. The
                     two defended capitalism in its purest laissez-faire form in a moment
                     when it was widely challenged, both by the working classes (as studied
                     in chapters 3–4) and by members of the British establishment (chap-
                     ters 1–2). Austerity was crystallized out of this very challenge. Ironi-
                     cally, it became clear that to defend the “natural doings” of laissez-faire
                     capitalism, direct coercive action was required.

                     The Challenges to Austerity from Within

                     The opposition to economic orthodoxy that exploded after the war
                     would have been enough to keep the Treasury controllers up at night.
                     Opposition to Britain’s traditional economic and monetary views had
                     seized government officials and civil servants, who with the war had
                     been introduced to the seemingly limitless fiscal potential of the state
                     apparatus. The orthodox “Treasury View,” according to which there
                     were natural limits to capital creation and government borrowing, no
                     longer had a leg to stand on. The point was made over and over again
                     that the reconstruction necessities and social projects required cheap



                                                                                                      167




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   167        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     loans. The formal suspension of the gold standard in March 1919 spoke
                     for the newfound priority of avoiding unemployment. As even the es-
                     tablishment’s newspaper had put it, the moment marked a palpable
                     “defeat of the dear-money party,” which was labeled “ineffective” and
                     “expensive” (“City Notes,” The Times, March 31, 1919, 21).
                        Published expressions of economic rebellion were collected in the
                     confidential files of the controllers of finance, testifying to their seem-
                     ing willingness to observe their enemies before running them down.
                     Even when the bite of austerity began to sting, the opposition did not
                     immediately wilt; these Treasury files kept meticulous track of it. Fig-
                     ures 6.1 and 6.2 give a sense of the continuity of the disgruntlement
                     throughout the first part of the 1920s.
                        In May 1920, harsh words appeared in The Times. The paper pub-
                     lished a reader’s letter that expressed one of the guiding intuitions of
                     this book: “Is the reduction of purchasing power a practicable proposi-
                     tion at this time? Is it consistent with the hopes which have been held
                     out of the betterment in the conditions of the working class?” (“High
                     Prices,” The Times, May 18, 1920, 10).
                        In October 1923, The Times reported criticisms from Mr. McKenna,
                     chairman of the London Joint Stock and Midland Bank and former




                     6.1. Clipping of a reader’s letter titled “High Prices” (The Times, May 18, 1920, 10)




                     168




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   168        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                            austerity, a british story




                     6.2. “City Notes” (The Times, October 25, 1923, 18).




                     chancellor of the exchequer (1915–1916), who in an address before the
                     Belfast Chamber of Commerce condemned the consequences of the
                     Treasury’s deflationary policy that brought down prices by “forced re-
                     striction of purchasing power . . . [that] could not fail to depress trade
                     and cause unemployment” (“City Notes,” The Times, October 25, 1923,
                     18; also see in T 176/5, fol. 150). Hence, a double sacrifice for the general
                     public: no consumption and no jobs.
                         In June 1924, the Advisory Committee of Finance and Commerce of
                     the Trades Union Congress and the Labour Party released a memoran-
                     dum declaring their “grave objections” to further deflation in order to
                     secure the gold standard: it would condemn people to unemployment.
                     They admonished: “an insistence on a rise in the Bank Rate at the pres-
                     ent time, whatever may be said for it in the long run, looks very much



                                                                                                      169




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   169        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     6.3. Advisory Committee of Finance and Commerce of the Trade Union Congress, memorandum on the
                     proposed raising of the bank rate in the near future, June 1924 (T 176/5, part 2, fols. 2–4).




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   170        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                    6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     like a sacrifice of the immediate interests of the general community to the
                     immediate interests of the bankers.” As figure 6.3 shows, Niemeyer
                     heavily underlined and annotated the memorandum. The document,
                     like many others, attests to the general awareness of the primary politi-
                     cal issue at stake: austerity policies had at their basis the sacrifice of the
                     vast majority of British citizens.
                        How were the experts capable of contending with such an onslaught
                     stemming from the very heart of the establishment? The answer lay in
                     an appeal to high economic theory. Indeed, the entwinement of eco-
                     nomic theory and austerity policies—so crucial in a moment of high
                     contestation—is the defining characteristic of austerity as we know it
                     today, where consensus complements coercion.

                     The Defense of Austerity: Economic
                     Theory to the Rescue

                     In the face of unrelenting opposition, Niemeyer and Blackett needed
                     solid intellectual grounds to urge the chancellor of the exchequer to
                     move for dear money and drastic cuts in public expenditures. In ex-
                     amining the controllers’ confidential Treasury files—virtually the only
                     direct source of information we have about their economic beliefs—
                     one is struck by the ubiquity and influence of the economist Ralph G.
                     Hawtrey, the primary source of economic knowledge for Blackett and
                     especially for Niemeyer. In fact, there is ample evidence that Hawtreyan
                     economics refined and strengthened the economic stance of the se-
                     nior Treasury officials, so as to enable the emergence of a full-blown
                     austerity doctrine.
                        Hawtrey was born into a well-to-do family in Slough, a town twenty
                     miles west of central London. He followed the cursus honorum of the
                     British elite: he graduated from Eton, the number one private school,
                     and after reading mathematics at Trinity College, Cambridge, under-
                     took a career as a civil servant. In 1919, he was appointed Director of
                     Financial Enquiries and was finally “sufficiently high placed in the
                     Treasury to be part of the inner process of policymaking” (Black 1977,
                     378). Hawtrey’s role was that of the first “in-house economist,” whose


                                                                                                      171




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   171        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     duty was to comment and offer advice on every aspect of economic
                     policy, a position he kept until his retirement in 1947, when he ac-
                     cepted a professorship at the Royal Institute of International Affairs.
                     During his tenure at the Treasury, Hawtrey was the sole official to be
                     an economic scholar of international standing; the crowning of his
                     academic career came in 1959 with an honorary fellowship at Trinity
                     College, Cambridge. Hawtrey established his name as a prominent
                     monetary economist with his 1913 Good and Bad Trade—a book that
                     articulated the monetary business cycle. His repute increased in 1919
                     with Currency and Credit.
                        Keynes, who was hugely influenced by his colleague and friend
                     Hawtrey, hailed Currency and Credit as “one of the most original and
                     profound treatises on the theory of money which has appeared for
                     many years” (Keynes 1920, in Peden 1996). The text first developed in-
                     sights that are today understood as Keynesian, including the centrality
                     of consumer income and consumer outlay in influencing the monetary
                     business cycle, and its necessary implication: the essence of monetary
                     management is much more than simply manipulating the quantity of
                     money in circulation, as the traditional quantity theory of money pur-
                     ports. It lies more deeply in manipulating the behavior of real eco-
                     nomic agents in terms of their incomes and expenditures.
                        Currency and Credit was widely used as a textbook in the 1920s. It
                     became a standard text for the Cambridge Tripos in economics as well
                     as overseas, including in the Harvard economics department, where
                     Hawtrey taught as a visiting professor in 1928–1929. David Laidler has
                     documented how during the interwar years Hawtrey’s influence even
                     reached the Chicago School of Economics (Laidler 1993).
                        Hawtrey had some shining moments, especially at the 1922 Genoa
                     Financial Conference, where his voice dominated all others. Years later
                     the expert recalled the “regular meetings with the delegates and other
                     officials every evening after the day’s proceedings.” Hawtrey had al-
                     ready presented his draft prescriptions (approved by Blackett and Nor-
                     man) at the preliminary meetings of experts in London; the Genoa
                     austerity financial code incorporated these. Another high moment
                     came when he personally advised Chancellor Churchill to make the


                     172




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   172        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     controversial decision to declare the return to the gold standard (Peden
                     2004b, 33–39). More than these specific episodes, however, Hawtrey’s
                     real impact was an indelible imprint on the most powerful minds of
                     the Treasury.
                         Blackett and Niemeyer regularly wrote notes to Hawtrey asking for
                     advice on economic matters, from the most technical and statistical
                     questions to specific policy suggestions. Hawtrey’s prolific responses
                     in the form of memoranda were thoroughly underlined, studied, ex-
                     changed, and discussed. His advice on monetary and fiscal principles
                     even spread outside the Treasury, including to the other main techno-
                     cratic institution in Britain—the Court of the Bank of England.
                         Hawtrey had frequent personal exchanges with the Bank’s governor,
                     Montagu Norman, especially during the hot years of 1919–1924. Nor-
                     man often asked Hawtrey for advice regarding the monetary policy that
                     should be implemented, and the two were often in fundamental agree-
                     ment. In 1920 Norman showed a spirit both keen and questioning in his
                     response to Hawtrey’s memo endorsing the decision to raise the Bank’s
                     interest rate all the way to 7 percent: “I am of course much in agreement
                     with respect to the memorandum you have kindly sent me. . . . I would
                     like you to consider this note—might not we, of the dear money school,
                     be taxed with bad faith if the rate were put up now?”
                         Norman’s appreciation for Hawtrey’s economic work was spread
                     to the whole Court, which throughout the 1920s was educated in
                     Hawtreyan economics. “Dear Mr. Hawtrey,” Norman wrote in 1923, “it
                     was very good of you to send me a copy of your new volume of Essays.
                     Your papers are always read here with great interest and although we
                     have studied one or two of the present series before, we shall not value
                     the book any less on that account. Yours very Truly” (February 6, 1923,
                     GBR/0014/HTRY 10/11, Churchill Archives Centre). Occasions for in-
                     tellectual suasion among the members of the British governing elite
                     were frequent. Bankers, Treasury officials, and economists were often
                     seen mingling. For example, the Tuesday Club—a small dining club
                     started by the stockbroker Oswald Toynbee Falk in 1917—convened fi-
                     nanciers, financial journalists, academic economists, and Treasury of-
                     ficials to discuss economic questions and the post-financial problems


                                                                                                      173




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   173        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     (Skidelsky 2003, 203). Regular members included Blackett, Niemeyer,
                     and Norman, as well as Keynes, who was a founding member.
                        In sum, Hawtreyan economics spread far and wide, becoming em-
                     bedded in the worldview of the most commanding minds of the leading
                     technocratic institutions that implemented austerity after World War I.
                     In a moment when budget cuts and dear money policies had lost their
                     veneer as “natural” policies and faced harsh public backlash, they re-
                     quired economic theory to justify them. Their grounding in economic
                     theory came through the personalities at the levers of power. This was
                     the true novelty of austerity—a project that was at once theory- and
                     policy-making, at once an ideological, material, and personal process.

                     Tackling Inflation

                     Currency and Credit was written as a general model of the world econ-
                     omy, but it also reflected Hawtrey’s preoccupations with the economic
                     struggles at hand. Indeed, his analysis was driven by one main fixation:
                     the inherent tendency for a market economy to spiral into inflation.
                        Inflation, Hawtrey believed, was the vicious expression of the “unruly
                     nature” of credit. Credit was the basis of the market economy. Hawtrey
                     modeled the market economy like a great credit machine, by which any
                     sort of economic relation could be understood as an exchange of debt
                     and credit between buyers and sellers. In this framework, relations of
                     exchange between consumers and producers overshadowed class rela-
                     tions within the production process.
                        Despite its technical jargon, the message of the Hawtreyan model
                     was actually quite simple: inflation was the main threat to the market
                     economy, and the causes of inflation fundamentally rested in exag-
                     gerated spending on the part of the general population—especially its
                     lower ranks. Indeed, the “unruly” nature of credit and its tendency to
                     expand excessively was fundamentally based on the unruly behavior of
                     the majority of citizens who undertook “unproductive” consumption.
                     The problem was not the expansion of credit in itself, but rather the
                     resulting increase in consumption that would propel a further increase
                     in credit. In Hawtrey’s words, “[t]he credit created for the purposes


                     174




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   174        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     of production becomes purchasing power in the hands of the people
                     engaged in production; the greater the amount of credit created, the
                     greater will be the amount of purchasing power” (Hawtrey 1919a, 13).
                        Hawtrey pointed his finger at the impact credit expansion had on
                     “effective demand”—a crucial macroeconomic concept which he in-
                     troduced in 1913, and which Keynes would further develop in his Gen-
                     eral Theory. Credit expansion increased effective demand, defined as
                     the “quantity of purchasing power in the hands of the public” (Hawtrey
                     1919a, 350).
                        To Hawtrey, such an over-consumptionist spiral was ever more dan-
                     gerous because it was not capable of self-correction. In an economic
                     upswing, increased incomes mean greater purchases by the general
                     consumers (i.e., workers) that “will be quickly reflected in further or-
                     ders to replenish the stocks of commodities” from the merchant (or
                     dealer), setting the credit machine into hyperactivity. After a certain
                     point, society reaches its productive limits and prices begin to rise (i.e.,
                     supply fails to increase), further aggravating the credit machine and
                     depreciating the value of money even more. This spiral has a self-
                     sustaining effect: peoples’ increased demand supports their own em-
                     ployment, since their purchases deplete the stock of goods; merchants
                     thus place more orders, inducing producers to increase production by
                     hiring more workers. In this sense, employment and higher wages are
                     seen not as an achievement of economic progress but as a threat to the
                     standard of value.
                        The war and immediate postwar climate made these dynamics even
                     more pronounced: “Prices will be high because the depleted stocks of
                     goods will be exposed to a large effective demand, the quantity of pur-
                     chasing power in the hands of the public having been swollen under
                     war conditions and the consumers’ income being maintained at a high
                     level corresponding to the activity of production” (Hawtrey 1919a, 350).
                        The “vicious expansion” of credit, Hawtrey argued, not only de-
                     bauched the internal standard of value; it also debauched the external
                     one. Hawtrey could not be more explicit: “It must be remembered that
                     the direct cause of adverse exchanges is too much buying . . . the buy-
                     ing of the dealers tends to follow the buying of the consumers” (ibid.,


                                                                                                      175




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   175        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     352, italics in original). In Hawtrey’s model the increase in consumers’
                     outlay—their capacity to spend—produces an adverse movement of the
                     foreign exchanges, since it attracts additional imports and diverts some
                     possible exports to the home market.
                        In his advice to Chancellor Chamberlain, Blackett adopted a
                     Hawtreyan take on the gravity of Britain’s postwar inflation. The rise in
                     prices was just the most visible indication of the rise in the “purchasing
                     power of the community” (“Dear Money,” February 12, 1920, T 176/5,
                     part 2, fol. 50) that spiked with the government’s expansionary war and
                     postwar policies. Blackett argued that the government exacerbated this
                     spiral by artificially increasing the amount of money in the hands of
                     the people. More precisely, the controller made explicit that it was the
                     increase in the purchasing power of a specific part of the population
                     that was responsible for such a dramatic price spike: “redistribution of
                     the purchasing power among the various classes of the community has
                     been altered in favour of those whose purchases were most severely
                     restricted by the narrowness of their purses” (ibid., T 176/5, part 2,
                     fol. 48).
                        Blackett derived the class consequences that were concealed by the
                     neutral syntax of the Hawtreyan model: the cause of the crisis rested in
                     workers’ wasteful behavior. Whereas before the war they were limited
                     by economic constraints, once their wages had risen workers were fun-
                     damentally reluctant to save.
                        During his efforts for the War Savings Committee, Blackett had de-
                     nounced how “[t]his war is bringing, in all the belligerent countries,
                     large sums into the pockets of the wage earners” (ibid., 77). For once,
                     Blackett said, there was “some surplus over bare necessities” that could
                     be saved; however, “[t]here was unfortunately a terrible amount of use-
                     less and wasteful extravagance,” and “[t]he cheap jewelry trade was
                     booming.” These classist attacks were indeed not far from Hawtrey’s
                     own understanding, at least once one pierces the veil of his economic
                     abstractions.
                        Currency and Credit articulated two types of consumers: “Where
                     there is an accession of income, the thrifty man will tend to invest
                     his windfall, the unthrifty to spend it” (Hawtrey 1919a, 42). It was the


                     176




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   176        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     “thrifty” and “prudent” man whose actions prevented inflationary
                     spirals; he saved rather than spent. Hawtrey, Blackett, and Niemeyer
                     shared an assumption that was well grounded in the economic ortho-
                     doxy of the time: savings automatically implied investment, thus re-
                     storing “the nation’s equipment of fixed capital and of its stocks of com-
                     modities” (Hawtrey 1919a, 348). Reconstruction required a plentiful
                     supply of capital, and “there is no way that capital can be made available
                     except through saving” (Blackett 1918a, 20–21).
                        Such a moral and individualist framework portrayed all agents in
                     society as deciding whether to be profligate or thrifty consumers. How-
                     ever, in his sparse references to workers (as contrasted with his pre-
                     dominant focus on consumers), Hawtrey himself could not help but
                     tacitly consider the structurally different material conditions that ul-
                     timately boxed the worker as the “unthrifty” type. For Hawtrey, wage
                     earners acted in a unidimensional way, that is, spending their wage “in
                     the course of the week on their day-to-day expenses” (Hawtrey 1919a,
                     20). Capturing a concrete reality at the time, Hawtrey did not expect
                     workers to possess bank accounts (except for the rare thrifty types, he
                     specified), with cash representing the entirety of the general popula-
                     tion’s liquid resources. In this sense the greater part of wages “comes
                     back to retailers in return for goods purchased” (ibid., 22).
                        It followed that the only consumers who had the capacity to be vir-
                     tuous and save were really the bourgeois. To be virtuous, the rest could
                     only fall in line and abstain through a curtailment of income. Thus the
                     presence within society of two categories of agents: those who could
                     undertake savings in the positive sense (by investing), and the majority
                     that should be led to undertake it in the negative sense (by abstain-
                     ing). Still today, mainstream economists provide these distinctions
                     by talking about the differences in the propensities to save (or to con-
                     sume), and if we look closely, these propensities are tacitly associated
                     with class differences. The implication is that lower incomes are due to
                     the unthrifty habits of individuals, as opposed to the subordinate posi-
                     tions of workers under capitalist social relations of production.
                        Blackett and Niemeyer denounced the postwar society as a distor-
                     tion of the virtuous script of capital accumulation, a product of how


                                                                                                      177




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   177        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     individuals found themselves in uniquely inverted conditions. Indeed,
                     the traditional distribution of purchasing power among classes had
                     been altered in favor of organized labor. While inflation could erode
                     real wages, trade unions were able to preserve workers’ purchasing
                     power by demanding higher money wages—even by going on strike if
                     necessary. Workers thus attained new income and had the tendency to
                     spend it all, on either domestic commodities or foreign commodities.
                     On the other hand, sections of the middle and upper classes—whose
                     income came from savings or deriving rents—had experienced a re-
                     duction of their real income and were unable to keep pace with prices.
                     These circumstances were the nemesis of monetary stability and capital
                     accumulation.
                        From a classist diagnosis came a classist solution. Hawtrey himself
                     put it bluntly: “The inflation of credit, by financing the war with less
                     than the due amount of sacrifice on the part of the people, actually at-
                     tracts superfluous imports; the problem is then not so much to finance
                     the imports, as to avoid attracting them. The solution is to be found
                     not in borrowing more money abroad, but in encouraging or enforcing
                     abstinence at home” (Hawtrey 1919a, 230, my italics).
                        The focus on abstinence reveals the individualistic approach of the
                     experts to tackling social problems. In a manner similar to the resolu-
                     tions of the Brussels and Genoa conferences, they saw economic dif-
                     ficulties as the result of improper individual behavior, which in turn
                     had to be fixed through sacrifice in the name of economic recovery.
                     The reader might be familiar with this rhetoric, as it pervades much of
                     public discourse even today.

                     Teaching Abstinence

                     Educating the general public to be thrifty was imperative—and, of
                     course, tricky. The campaign for abstinence had already started during
                     World War I, and Blackett and Niemeyer were prominent members of
                     the War Savings Movement in Great Britain that “enforced the lesson
                     of patriotic abstention from self-indulgence” (Blackett 1918a, 30). The
                     movement preached “patriotic self denial” (Blackett 1918b, 210), with


                     178




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   178        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     the immediate rationale of financing the state’s war effort through the
                     purchase of Treasury bonds.
                        Blackett took the mission to heart, and between 1916 and 1917 he
                     traveled across Britain and the United States to zealously lecture au-
                     diences on how to “deny themselves comforts and luxuries” (Blackett
                     1918a, 16). In a public speech in New York City he spelled out the spirit
                     of sacrifice that would become the basis of austerity: “Produce more,
                     consume less, waste nothing . . . it does not matter whether or what
                     you are paid for your services: spend your money and yourself in the
                     service of your country” (ibid., 70).
                        This prescription was not to be interpreted as grim and exceptional,
                     he clarified, but rather as a condition for economic progress to be de-
                     veloped into a universal norm. Blackett admonished the crowd, “[w]ere
                     we not all tired of the ostentatious extravagances of the pre-war period?
                     Has not the war taught us that our sense of values had gone wrong?”
                     (ibid., 20). Learning the custom of thrift, he told the New York teachers,
                     had to begin at a very early age: “By not buying candy, or by not going
                     to the movies, they [children] could increase the amount standing to
                     their credit in the school War Savings Association” (ibid., 73–74).
                        The wealthy classes had an important role to play as models of vir-
                     tue: “What the well-to-do can do is by the force of their personal exam-
                     ple acting upon and influencing public opinion to show the way to the
                     workers. . . . It is amazing what a difference personal example among
                     the well-to-do, and particularly in the case of women, makes on the ef-
                     fectiveness of the War Savings campaign among the workers” (ibid., 18).
                        Niemeyer shared these beliefs. A decade later, he exported the Brit-
                     ish model to Brazil by advising its government “to encourage the for-
                     mation of a voluntary committee of suitable persons for the organi-
                     zation and propaganda of thrift throughout the country” (Niemeyer
                     1931, 22).
                        Britain’s experts were, however, under no illusion: after the war, the
                     degree to which the system was being contested meant that workers
                     were no longer inclined to abide by the behavioral dictates of the ruling
                     classes. Chamberlain’s financial statement of April 1919 expressed the
                     perceived change of people’s attitude:


                                                                                                      179




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   179        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                        We all know what has happened since the signature of the Armistice.
                        There has been a détente in men’s minds. . . . People who during the War
                        strove their utmost to save and to place their savings at the disposal of
                        the Government are less willing to make those sacrifices now . . . both
                        the House and the people are in a different mood to-day, and I am called
                        upon . . . to provide the means for creating within a few months or a few
                        years a new heaven and a new earth. (Austen Chamberlain, Financial
                        Statement 1919, HC Deb 30 April 1919, vol. 115, cc 175–76)


                     Against this “relaxation” of spirit, Hawtrey, Niemeyer, and Blackett es-
                     poused economic policies that would directly impose abstinence on the
                     working classes, thwarting any unwillingness to sacrifice. Fiscal, indus-
                     trial, and monetary austerity served exactly this purpose.

                     Fiscal Austerity

                     During the summer of 1919, under direct advice of his Treasury experts,
                     Chancellor Chamberlain offered a public ultimatum: “If we cannot
                     balance revenue and expenditure next year, our credit—national and
                     international—will be seriously shaken and the results may be disas-
                     trous” (July 26, 1919, T 171/170).
                        This call for budgetary rigor was a step (and pretext) toward sowing
                     the behavioral shift among the “unruly” majority, with a goal of cur-
                     ing inflation. It also served as justification for increasing (regressive)
                     taxation and cutting government expenditure; both policies curtailed
                     consumption for the majority and incentivized savings/investment for
                     the minority.

                     Taxation to Impose Thrift

                     “Taxation,” Hawtrey wrote, “by reducing people’s resources, gives them
                     an inducement to reduce their consumption of commodities” (Hawtrey
                     1919a, 351). In a moment in which overextending taxation to the work-
                     ing classes faced peak opposition, Hawtrey praised taxation’s ability to
                     force abstention on the people.


                     180




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   180        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               austerity, a british story


                         During the war period, mounting workers’ movements opposed the
                     state’s extractive measures, which had increased the tax base to include
                     much of the working classes for the first time. High inflation after the
                     war exacerbated the contentious and political nature of such reforms,
                     with unions demanding a reduction of the tax burden to account for
                     increased cost of living. After the war, and still facing popular de-
                     mands, the Treasury refused to pay the high financial price of restoring
                     prewar-level exemptions in real terms (i.e., to take account of inflation),
                     a measure which would have freed 2.2 million of 3.4 million income-tax
                     payers from this form of hardship.
                         To impose “compulsory thrift” upon the classes who, in the view
                     of experts, were structurally incapable of saving/investing, indirect
                     taxation—that is, taxation on consumption goods—was the most effec-
                     tive means. Indirect taxation was at once less visible (thus less contest-
                     able) and more pernicious. It transferred purchasing power away from
                     people whose earnings were too small to be liable to the income tax
                     but who could still not do without basic goods. It was the definition of
                     regressive taxation: “the smaller the income, the larger is the rate upon
                     it which the taxes represent” (HMSO 1927, 211–13).
                         Spurred by the advice of Treasury experts, in his budget of April
                     1920 Chancellor Chamberlain introduced a further tax increase on
                     working-class consumption goods such as tobacco, beer, and spirits, all
                     of which had already risen during the year prior. As table 6.1 shows,
                     the weight of indirect taxes grew throughout the decade.
                         Hawtrey repeatedly cited how regressive measures like these suited
                     the priorities of capitalist recovery. “It is only by financial methods,
                     such as drastic taxation, which tend to curtail the expenditure of the

                     Table .. Distribution of taxes in Britain
                                                       Direct Taxes                            Indirect Taxes
                     Year                              (in percentage)                         (in percentage)
                     –                                .                                     .
                     –                                .                                     .
                     –                                .                                     .
                     Source: Chancellor of the Exchequer, Budget, vol. , -, T /, ; and Inland
                     Revenue, Budgets of April and September , IR /.



                                                                                                                181




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   181        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                    6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     individual upon consumable commodities, that deflation and capital
                     expenditure can both be encouraged” (Hawtrey 1919a, 351).
                        Indeed, once utilized with the purpose of repaying debt and interest
                     on debt, regressive taxation did serve to avoid demand-driven credit
                     expansion and induced the virtue of investment through transfers of
                     wealth “from the poorer to the richer” (HMSO 1927, 99). Between 1921
                     and 1932, the largest item in the chancellor’s budget was in fact debt
                     service, which meant that the nation was shifting tax revenue to holders
                     of the national debt—the portion of the community that, according to
                     our technocrats, was more “inclined” to save, and thus invest.
                        In October 1921, Niemeyer sent a note to the chancellor in which
                     he made this economic logic very explicit: “When debt is repaid out of
                     money collected by taxation from the citizens at large it is used to pay
                     off loan holders, that is that portion of the community which is more
                     inclined to save than the rest and the tendency will be for the inves-
                     tor who is paid off to reinvest his money in other securities. In other
                     words, debt repayment extracts money from those who are not likely
                     to save and invest and makes it available to those that are more likely
                     to do so” (T 176/5, part 2, fols. 39–40, my italics). In other words, the
                     state extracting money from the working classes was the key to capital
                     accumulation.
                        Once again, Niemeyer’s words echoed those of Hawtrey, who in 1920
                     had written, “taxation for debt redemption takes money from people
                     who might otherwise spend it on themselves and uses it to increase
                     the resources of the capital market” (“Mr McKenna on over-taxation,”
                     GBR/0014/HTRY 1/14, Churchill Archives Centre). Still in 1932 Blackett
                     had very similar thoughts: “Sinking fund payments may indeed be a
                     useful method of assisting to build up capital for productive purposes”
                     (Blackett 1932, 236).
                        With the same goal of rewarding the saver/investors, experts con-
                     ceived of ways to lower taxation for the wealthy classes. Here again the
                     rationale was simple: since the wealthy classes have a natural propensity
                     to save, high direct taxation on these classes would check savings and
                     discourage investment. Niemeyer wrote: “The level of taxation must
                     not be inconsistent with the economic life of the country and with the


                     182




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   182        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     accumulation of fresh capital” (T 176/39, fol. 62). Higher death duties
                     and “Capital Levies [taxation on capital] mean a much more serious
                     loss to the country at large” (Niemeyer, March 13, 1926, T 176/39, fol. 59)
                     since, as Blackett put it, the levies would “trench” on “the nation’s capi-
                     tal” (Blackett 1932, 240).
                        This wording illustrates the subtlety of austerity’s political message,
                     one that rationalizes and justifies the shift (or extraction) of resources
                     from the many to the few. These virtuous few were wealthy not only
                     because of their individual moral qualities; they also operated to fortify
                     capital accumulation, which was assumed to be in the national interest.
                        This thinking, which remains pervasive today, was successful in de-
                     feating the many radical redistributive reforms on taxing wealth that
                     had arisen in the immediate aftermath of the war. Introduced in April
                     1920, the corporation tax was reduced by half as early as 1923, and was
                     ultimately abolished in 1924. It would return to the House of Com-
                     mons only after World War II. Similarly, the 1915 Excess Profit Duty—a
                     major victory for British trade unions—was completely eliminated in
                     1921. Even more emblematic of the triumph of austerity was the fate
                     of the capital levy. Deemed the battle horse of the Labour Party  after
                     the war—uniting a widespread attack against profiteers—by the mid-
                     1920s the idea of it was dead and buried. The Committee on National
                     Debt and Taxation voiced the novel social internalization that justified
                     profit-making and the riches of the capitalist class. The capital levy, it
                     was suggested, “involved a penalisation of thrift which is both unjust
                     and also economically indefensible” (HMSO 1927, 402).
                        Of course, when operating under the guise of budgetary rigor, the
                     state could lower taxation on the few only if it curtailed public expendi-
                     ture. A thrifty state was to technocrats the ultimate mantra to overcome
                     the postwar crisis. The majority of the population had to be forced
                     to abstain not only from individual consumption but also from public
                     consumption at large, grossly subverting the postwar reconstructionist
                     trend. Blackett warned of the dangers of the government’s complicity in
                     supporting citizens to live beyond their means: “The attempt to main-
                     tain standards of living for everyone, above those which the economic
                     activities of the nation justified, by means of government expenditure


                                                                                                      183




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   183        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     out of taxation is in part responsible for the breakdown” (Blackett 1932,
                     240). For our experts, such excesses were no longer tolerable.

                     The Attack on Social Expenditures

                     Hawtrey had set it in stone in Currency and Credit: in addition to taxa-
                     tion, reduction of public expenditure was vital to curtail consumers’
                     income and redirect resources for private capital investment.
                         By the summer of 1920 the Treasury was pressing all departments
                     to provide a progress report in order to cut expenditure within a fort-
                     night. Later, in December 1920, the cabinet explicitly gave in to these
                     anti-reconstructionist pressures: “Whilst recognising that there are
                     many reforms that are in themselves desirable in order to improve con-
                     ditions in the United Kingdom . . . to the extent that such reforms in-
                     volve further burdens upon the Exchequer or the Rates the time is not
                     opportune for initiating them or putting them into operation” (“Draft
                     Resolutions on Economy,” December 8, 1920, CAB 23/23, ff. 196). The
                     cabinet therefore instructed that all “schemes involving expenditures
                     not yet in operation are to remain in abeyance” (ibid.).
                         The Treasury’s fiscal austerity went well beyond curtailment of the
                     reconstructionist plans discussed in chapter 2. Its greatest victory came
                     in the unprecedented Geddes Axe of 1921—a legend in British politics,
                     as it represented the country’s largest expenditure squeeze in the twen-
                     tieth century. It beat even the renowned cuts of the Thatcher Admin-
                     istration in the late 1970s and 1980s. The Geddes legislation sliced an
                     additional £52 million from the public budget beyond the £75 million
                     that the Treasury had already planned in the summer (see table 6.2).
                     The two combined were a remarkable reduction in historical perspec-
                     tive, amounting to about 20 percent of central government spending
                     (Hood and Himaz 2014, 8). A telling indicator of austerity’s actual ob-
                     jectives, the axe gashed the British population even though Britain had
                     already attained a primary surplus the year before. Britain’s governing
                     body for social budgeting, the Committee of National Expenditure, or
                     the “Geddes Committee,” was a technical body working closely with
                     the Treasury. The chancellor and his experts kept the budget-cutting


                     184




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   184        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     priority alive through numerous briefs that guided the committee’s
                     work (see Blackett’s note in T 171/202, fols. 34–39). In his speech for the
                     House of Commons in March 1922 Chancellor Robert Horne expressed
                     profound gratitude to the “highly capable body of men” (T 172/1228
                     part 3, fol. 3) who had “discharged the very onerous task” that the Trea-
                     sury had “laid upon them” through “unremitting labour.” He valorized
                     this effort to economize, calling it the “most valuable services to the
                     community” (ibid., f. 2). Such a “service” to the “community” consisted
                     in bulldozing all postwar emancipatory proposals.
                        The British citizens faced the defeat of the public housing program—
                     the existence of which many Treasury officials had opposed since the
                     program’s inception. Of course, with the curtailment of government
                     subsidies and a vigorous policy of sale of public housing came the de-
                     feat of the building guilds movement examined in chapter 3. Christo-
                     pher Addison, the champion of the Housing and Town Planning Act
                     of 1919, resigned from government in protest, while the minister of
                     health, Sir Alfred Mond, was left to lament this turn of events as inimi-
                     cal to “the housing needs of the community. . . . There will remain many
                     cases of serious overcrowding and evil slum conditions in many places”
                     (June 22, 1921, T 161/132, fol. 51).
                        Citizens also watched the burial of the plan for universal health care,
                     which would ultimately have to wait until after World War II to be re-
                     vamped. It was instead supplanted by a proposal for a 15 percent cut
                     for the Ministry of Health, which coincided with the renunciation of
                     the educational gains promised by the 1918 Education Act—including
                     the plan for universal continued education until the age of sixteen—
                     that ultimately remained only on paper. The Board of Education was a
                     particular nuisance to the Treasury, as it was “determined not to allow
                     political pressures for the economy on public expenditures” to “halt
                     the normal growth of educational provision.” The board took a blow
                     when the Geddes Committee proposed £18 million in cuts, a 32 per-
                     cent decrease from the previous year; the government ended up cutting
                     more than £16 million for education. Such slashes strangled the educa-
                     tion system by closing small schools, reducing salaries, and increasing
                     class sizes (T 172/1228 part 7, see fols. 4–5). The teachers were docked


                                                                                                      185




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   185        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Table .. Spending cuts in Britain for main budget categories between  and
                      (in m)
                                                      Social                           Total
                                    Defense Education Security Health Foreign Salaries (in m)
                     Nominal
                     cuts                                                                        
                     Real cuts
                     ( prices)                                                               
                     The cuts in real terms are even more impressive than those in nominal terms because of the
                     effect of falling prices between  and . I represent the cuts in real terms to highlight
                     the severity of the already deep cuts. Note that prior to the Geddes Committee’s involvement
                     the chancellor had already planned m in cuts. The Committee recommended additional
                     cuts, totaling m.
                     Source: Hood and Himaz ().



                     5 percent of their salary. It goes without saying that the ambitious plans
                     for critical adult working-class education (studied in chapter 2) were
                     choked by these cuts, to the point that the Central Labour College shut
                     down in 1929 for lack of funding. Central government expenditure on
                     education and on health insurance remained below the 1921–1922 level
                     for the rest of the decade (see Peden 1985).
                        These impacts reverberated among people across the empire. The
                     Geddes Committee prescribed reductions in services to colonies, mak-
                     ing explicit that “the assistance which can be given by the British Ex-
                     chequer to our African Dependencies must be limited to the most ur-
                     gent requirements which those Dependencies can show themselves to
                     be unable to meet out of their own resources” (HMSO 1922d, 12).
                        By 1922, all sectors of social policies were unable to resist the econ-
                     omy drive: the state’s priority of debt reduction propelled a constant
                     flow of resources from the working classes to the creditor classes of
                     society. In fact, the large primary surplus reached a peak of 9 percent
                     of nominal GDP in 1923; the surplus was used mainly to finance the
                     redemption of debt. The amount the British state spent (as a share of
                     nominal GDP) to pay creditors was almost double the amount spent
                     for social measures (specifically, the sum spent on health and educa-
                     tion) for each year of the decade starting from 1921–22.
                        It is telling that the only expenditure that did not fall during these


                     186




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   186        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                     6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     years—and in fact skyrocketed—was unemployment insurance. This
                     was the result not of greater generosity in the subsidies, but of a qua-
                     drupling of unemployed workers from 1920 to 1921, with an unemploy-
                     ment rate above 10 percent of the insured workforce for the whole de-
                     cade. It can be argued that unemployment was the most emblematic
                     measure of austerity-induced social sacrifice. As the reader will learn
                     in the following pages, this social calamity was an expected and even
                     intentional outcome of the austerity doctrine of the British technocrats.
                        In fact, the two companions of fiscal austerity—industrial and mon-
                     etary policies—actively collaborated to worsen the employment pos-
                     sibilities, and thus the wages, of British workers. Again, this population
                     was forced into financial abstinence.

                     Industrial Austerity

                     The Treasury’s technocrats knew that the defeat of inflation and the
                     rehabilitation of capital accumulation could not occur without indus-
                     trial austerity. Industrial austerity came in the form of privatization and
                     legal measures to discipline and repress labor.

                     Privatization and Depoliticization:
                     The Crowding- Out Argument

                     The state’s large-scale dismantling of its wartime control facilitated the
                     depoliticization of the country’s economy—a process to shore up the
                     pillars of private property and wage relations and to protect the invest-
                     ing classes.
                        The Treasury fervently supported a privatization drive, which in
                     part took the form of eradicating all “superfluous ministries.” This
                     included the Ministry of Reconstruction, the Ministry of Transport,
                     the Ministry of Munitions, the Ministry of Shipping, and the Ministry
                     of Food, all abolished in 1921. The Ministry of Labour was also under
                     Treasury’s brutal attack and barely survived the cut.
                        It goes without saying that austerity targeted public employees, too.
                     In the summer of 1919 the chancellor complained loudly: “the number


                                                                                                      187




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   187        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     still employed in the public services have, in the aggregate, hardly de-
                     creased perceptively since the war. That cannot be defended. . . . Every-
                     thing in excess of this must be ruthlessly cut down. In the interest of
                     economy we must be willing to content ourselves with the second best
                     where the best is too costly” (August 28, 1919, T 170/171, fol. 2).
                         The Treasury’s demands were satisfied. In 1920 and 1921 total
                     civil employment fell from 19,537,000 to 17,417,000 (Feinstein 1972,
                     Table T-126), meaning that the government laid off 11 percent of all
                     public employees in a single year. The Geddes Axe also contributed its
                     share, saving the Treasury 5 percent in GDP through layoffs and cuts
                     in wages.
                         Certainly, economy of resources was the explicit pretext. More fun-
                     damentally, these policies derailed the alarming postwar social pro-
                     cesses that were detailed in chapters 3 and 4, in particular their ten-
                     dency toward upward pressure. The “grandiose ideas of departments”
                     (April 6, 1925, T 176/21, fol. 10), as Niemeyer put it, had to be formally
                     opposed, since only once “their appetites [were] definitely checked”
                     would the appetites of their employees also be checked (ibid.). The
                     austerity logic was impeccable: once people lost their jobs in the pub-
                     lic sector, they would be thrown into the unrestrained private labor
                     market, and thus would have to abide by its incontestable laws of sup-
                     ply and demand. Economic necessity disciplined workers; it subdued
                     potential for political misbehavior.
                         These insights explain the Treasury’s fierce opposition to any pub-
                     lic plans to contest the country’s rising unemployment. Noteworthy
                     is the Gairloch episode in the autumn of 1921, in which some Liberal
                     ministers met in the Scottish village under the aegis of Prime Minister
                     Lloyd George to pressure the Treasury to embrace an expansive policy
                     of loan-financed public works to create new jobs. The Treasury was
                     bombarded with proposals: from the Gairloch Scheme for a national
                     development loan (T 172/1208, fols. 43–45), to a railway electrification
                     plan (ibid., fols. 85–86), to a plan of the minister of health for the uti-
                     lization of war savings money for unemployment relief works (ibid.,
                     fol. 87). Blackett and Niemeyer strongly opposed these and other “wild
                     cat schemes” (ibid.), warning the chancellor that “the national financial


                     188




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   188        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     position makes it therefore imperative to limit assistance to something
                     near the barest minimum needed to prevent starvation” (ibid., fol. 143).
                         Just as privatization disciplined workers to accept their place in the
                     vertical relations of production, it also benefited the saver-investor
                     classes. The controllers’ agenda was immovable: the state had to re-
                     lease all possible resources in favor of private enterprise. In Niemeyer’s
                     words: “Industry could not permanently prosper while the state was
                     absorbing the greater part of investible savings” (T 176/21, fol. 26). In
                     1922, Blackett used the same terminology: “the fund of investible capital
                     is reduced by the lending to the government of what might otherwise
                     be lent to trade” (T 171/202, fol. 23). Here lies the crux of the crowding-
                     out argument: the government is accused of diverting private savings
                     from the investment market—money that would otherwise be invested
                     in more productive private enterprises.
                         At least until 1924, Keynes shared these austere beliefs. When start-
                     ing work on his Treatise on Money, he had no doubts that “[a] supply
                     of new capital can only come into existence insofar as those who have
                     claims on the community’s flow of income are willing to defer their
                     claims, i.e., out of savings. The expenditure, on the production of fixed
                     capital, of public money which has been raised by borrowing, can do
                     nothing of itself to improve matters; and it may do actual harm if it
                     diverts existing working capital away from the production of goods”
                     (Keynes 1971, vol. 13, 19–23).
                         The evils of public works did not stop there. Public works could also
                     be inflationary. This was because the government did not always bor-
                     row from “genuine savings” (i.e., taxes or Treasury bonds), but rather
                     financed its investment through novel credit expansion—a wartime
                     practice that our technocrats abhorred. Cheap money was the greatest
                     of Hawtrey’s peeves since it propelled an inflationary upturn that in-
                     creased employment, and ultimately boosted wages and working-class
                     consumption—which in turn triggered monetary instability and esca-
                     lated the threat to capital accumulation.
                         The Treasury did not abandon the crowding-out argument later,
                     even in the face of the social crisis following the 1929 crash. In 1929,
                     Stanley Baldwin’s conservative government’s pleas for public works


                                                                                                      189




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   189        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     to confront the “miserable condition” of the 1.5 million unemployed
                     British citizens fell on deaf ears. Indeed, austerity was the mantra with
                     which the Treasury pressured the government to approach the Great
                     Depression, even after the fall of the gold standard in 1931 (see Peden
                     1996, 69–88).

                     Wages, Unemployment, Strikes

                     A fundamental plank of austerity dogma is that a drastic reduction in
                     wages can cure any economic downturn.
                        Higher wages not only lead to excessive consumption; they also pro-
                     duce the parallel problem of higher production costs. Technocrats after
                     the Great War knew that the increased bargaining power of organized
                     labor (T 172/1208) meant that inflation would not act as a device for
                     reducing real wages; it would merely escalate costs of production that
                     would result in rising export prices (T 176/5, part 2, fol. 35).
                        The need to lower prices in order to boost exports is repeated time
                     and again in the notes and memoranda of the two controllers (see
                     T 176/21, fol. 27; February 19, 1923, T 172/214, fol. 4). Niemeyer was ex-
                     plicit: “It is generally admitted that if British trade is to compete in the
                     markets of the world, the price of British goods must come down. This
                     in effect means that the wages of British labour must come down” (Nie-
                     meyer, T 175/5, part 2, fol. 36).
                        The “recipe for the long-term general interest” was the people’s dual
                     sacrifice of decreased consumption (which would reduce internal de-
                     mand and prices) and decreased wages (which would permit lower
                     costs of production and thus improve competitiveness). As Blackett
                     put it, the “period of painful process to return to sound conditions will
                     begin to be succeeded by a revival of industry on a new basis of reduced
                     wages and reduced prices” (June 8, 1921, T 175.6, part 1, fol. 1).
                        Hawtrey had anticipated these thoughts in his talk to the British As-
                     sociation for the Advancement of Science in 1919: “deflation also inevi-
                     tably involves a reduction of wages. This is an indispensable condition
                     both of the reduction of cost of production and of the reduction of
                     effective demand. . . . By facing a period of tribulation we can get back


                     190




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   190        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     to a sound currency, and shall reap our reward in having a clear future
                     before us” (Hawtrey 1919b, 433–34).
                         To these experts, unemployment was not a feature of market capital-
                     ism, but rather a temporary phenomenon. If the unemployment lasted
                     too long, it would be attributed to workers’ failure to be virtuous citi-
                     zens. Thus, unemployment was another indicator of the true culprits
                     of the economic crisis: the majority of citizens who were earning too
                     much, thus spending too much—leading as we know to expansion of
                     credit and thus an inflationary spiral. The correlation drawn between
                     unemployment and excessive wages is lucid in Niemeyer’s account: “If
                     present wages are to be maintained a certain part of the population
                     must go without wages. The practical manifestation of which is unem-
                     ployment” (Niemeyer, T 176/5, part 2, fol. 37).
                         Of course, lower wages as an “indispensable condition” for capital
                     rehabilitation was the opposite of what people were demanding. And
                     once again, these experts were aware of the class conflict in the offing.
                     Hawtrey wrote: “It seems not unlikely that the difficulty of reducing
                     [wages] again will be the determining factor in the settlement of the
                     future monetary units.”
                         Fortunately for the economists, the economic downturn greatly
                     reduced these difficulties. Starting in the summer of 1920, unemploy-
                     ment rose swiftly and spectacularly as the tide began to turn against the
                     workers. Nevertheless, workers continued to strike at a massive scale
                     throughout the year. As the historian James Cronin observed, “perhaps
                     the best evidence of depth of class antagonism in 1919/20 is how long
                     it took to abate” (Cronin 1979, 127). Clearly, with high levels of labor
                     organization the release of coercive market forces required political
                     boosting. Hence, industrial austerity, as put into practice by the British
                     government, envisaged techniques of legal action to curtail workers’
                     bargaining power and their freedom of association. Ironically, Treasury
                     officials did not condemn state intervention when it came to matters of
                     law and order; in those cases it was a reason to rejoice.
                         The October 1920 Emergency Powers Act was the first restrictive
                     legislation in response to the great wave of strikes. It allowed the gov-
                     ernment to declare a “state of emergency” whereby it could exercise


                                                                                                      191




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   191        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     wide, even repressive powers as it deemed necessary for any “purposes
                     essential to the public safety and the life of the community” (Emer-
                     gency Powers Act, 1920, Section 2.1 [Regulations], HC Deb. vol. 199,
                     28 September 1926, cc 409–508).
                        The government widely adopted such prerogatives during the gen-
                     eral strike of 1926, and its new legal latitude equipped it to break the
                     strike in a little over a week. In August 1927, Parliament passed the Trade
                     Disputes and Trade Unions Act “to vindicate the authority of the state
                     and protect the liberties of the citizen,” as characterized by Attorney
                     General Douglas Hogg (HC Deb 2 May 1927, vol. 205, cc 1307). The
                     American economist H. A. Millis, who published a long analysis of
                     the legislation in the Journal of Political Economy in 1928, summarized
                     the unforgiving nature of the Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act.

                           The new legislation changes [the] situation in several respects: (1) by
                           placing restrictions upon the right to strike, and to lock out; (2) by im-
                           posing further restrictions upon “picketing”; (3) by striking at the finan-
                           cial support of the political activities of labor; (4) by requiring the or-
                           ganizations of civil servants to divorce them-selves from, and to remain
                           out of, affiliation to other trade unions and the Labour Party, and also
                           to refrain from political activities; and (5) by placing limitations on pro-
                           labor local governments and other public authorities. (Millis 1928, 306)


                     In the name of general interest, the authorities protected themselves
                     from the recurrence of general strikes by outlawing any sympathetic
                     stoppages and any political strikes, including those strikes that stood
                     for a general amelioration of workers’ labor conditions (beyond a spe-
                     cific occupation) and those demanding nationalization. In a nutshell,
                     it was possible to strike for a clause, but not for a cause. Incitement to
                     participate in an unlawful strike became a criminal offense, punishable
                     by imprisonment for up to two years; the attorney general was em-
                     powered to sequester the assets and funds of unions involved in such
                     strikes. In this way the British state put a final nail in the coffin of labor
                     solidarity and demands for social change.



                     192




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   192        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                        Even Millis had to admit that the act was a unique episode in Brit-
                     ish history, inasmuch as it “curtailed the rights of labour on both the
                     industrial and the political fields” (Millis 1928, 315). The results were
                     immediate. The average number of disputes in 1927 and 1928 fell to half
                     of those in the years 1924 to 1925 (Mitchell 1998, Table b.3, 176). Even
                     more impressively, as Miliband put it, “while the average number of
                     workers involved in strikes and lock-outs in each of the three years
                     1919–1921 was 2,108,000, in each of the thirteen years 1927–1939 it was
                     308,100—and not by any means because Labour lacked major griev-
                     ances in those years, or achieved notable successes by the use of its
                     parliamentary strength” (Miliband 1961, 148–49). By 1930 union mem-
                     bership had halved with respect to 1920 (going down from 8.4 million
                     to 4.8 million participants—see chapter 9, figure 9.4).
                        This momentous turn of events, from labor empowered to labor
                     defeated, cannot be fully explained without an investigation into the
                     workings of monetary deflation—the queen of all austerity policies in
                     Britain—without which the subjugation of the British workers could
                     not have been achieved.

                     Monetary Austerity

                     Dear Money and Savings

                     The Treasury controllers stood fast on Hawtrey’s main theoretical
                     principle: credit was “unruly,” or “a peculiarly unstable and sensitive
                     phenomenon,” as Blackett wrote in a note to Chamberlain. This theory
                     had a weighty policy implication. Credit’s lack of self-regulation and
                     its constant expansionary tendencies required “national control” over
                     its supply (Hawtrey 1919, 50). Hence, rather than a hands-off monetary
                     policy, British experts wholeheartedly endorsed monetary manage-
                     ment through the manipulation of the bank rate in order to achieve the
                     desired economic “equilibrium” (Hawtrey 1919a, 24).
                         A return to currency stability, Hawtrey wrote, entailed “a painful
                     and laborious journey,” and “the painful and laborious journey must



                                                                                                      193




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   193        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     be travelled, after every indulgence in inflation . . . after the debauch
                     comes the headache” (Hawtrey 1919a, 375). Once more the burden of
                     this journey fell primarily on the workers through reduced incomes
                     and restricted consumption—both necessary for monetary manage-
                     ment to be successful.
                        In Hawtrey’s model, a rise in the interest rate was very effective to
                     this end since it discouraged merchants from borrowing, meaning a
                     reduced circulation of credit. With merchants halting the credit ma-
                     chine, manufacturers would reduce production and reduce employ-
                     ment, curtailing the income of wage earners and hence their expendi-
                     ture, further slowing down the economy, since merchants had even less
                     incentive to borrow to replenish their stock. In a few words, dear money
                     meant less employment and less income in the pockets of consumers.
                        Facing opposition but holding fast to their Hawtreyan economic
                     theory, the Treasury and the Bank of England put into action an un-
                     precedented dosage of dear money. By April 1920, Governor Norman
                     and the Treasury had agreed on a 7 percent rate that was maintained for
                     over a year. For the first time, a high bank rate was used to satisfy the
                     objective of stabilizing domestic prices.
                        This “swift and severe dose of dear money” was supported by the
                     most commanding minds not only of the Treasury but also of British
                     academia more generally. Both Pigou and Keynes rooted for an even
                     higher rate. Pigou’s influential article in The Times (March 1, 1920)
                     pushed for an 8 percent rate, while Keynes went further by advising
                     the chancellor in a private letter that “the rate for money should be put
                     to 7 percent and then again soon after to 8 percent. The results of this
                     action would have to be watched. But as a personal opinion I should
                     not be surprised if 10 percent would be required to achieve the nec-
                     essary results.” These drastic prescriptions were the outcome of the
                     catastrophic diagnosis that all British technocrats shared: inflation was
                     understood not merely as an economic problem, but as an existential
                     threat to the capitalist order. Indeed, rising prices would exacerbate
                     workers’ demands for higher wages and greater social redistribution,
                     and could even light a revolutionary charge. In his 1919 bestselling book
                     The Economic Consequences of the Peace, Keynes paraphrased Lenin to


                     194




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   194        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     caution: “the best way to destroy the Capitalist System [is] to debauch
                     the currency” (see Mann 2017, 235).
                         In August 1920, Hawtrey was still advocating even dearer money.
                     Prices had fallen, but not enough. “The problem before the country
                     is to reduce prices by something between 20 and 25 per cent” (“The
                     Government’s Currency Policy,” August 4, 1920, GBR/0014/HTRY 1/13,
                     Churchill Archives Centre). A year later, Hawtrey proudly affirmed that
                     the deflationist policy was finally effective. He wrote, “[w]hat actually
                     happened in this country was a combination of high bank rate, budget
                     surplus and an agreed restriction of credit by the banks” (“The Credit
                     Situation,” July 1921, GBR/0014/HTRY 1/13, Churchill Archives Centre;
                     also in T 176.5, part 1, fol. 6b).
                         Niemeyer defended deflation on pedagogical grounds. During the
                     inflationary boom, “people were living in a fool’s paradise.” In 1921, he
                     was of the conviction that “[w]e have, after all, made one big step in
                     advance. We have all realised that after four years of devastating war
                     the country is and must be poorer than before” (T 176/5, part 1, fol. 17b).
                     Niemeyer sought to position this shift as long-term, cautioning that the
                     government would lose the “educative effect” of deflation if the country
                     reverted to cheap money: “People will say: scarcity is over: money is
                     cheap: there is no need for economy: and rush down the steep place
                     for inflation until the shilling goes the way of the franc and the mark”
                     (February 3, 1920, T 176/5, part 2, fol. 70).
                         As with taxation, technocrats viewed deflation as effective because
                     it operated differently on the different classes of society. While defla-
                     tion forced workers to abstain, it rewarded the creditor classes of so-
                     ciety with a higher return on capital. The latter were thus encouraged
                     to save.
                         Certainly, a rise in the exchange rate was detrimental to export-
                     oriented British businesses due to a fall in international competitive-
                     ness. But experts saw it as a short-term adjustment. The pressures of
                     unemployment caused by deflation also served to lower production
                     costs, which in turn made British exports even more competitive.
                         By October 1921 Niemeyer could proudly state: “There is already
                     a tendency for some wages to fall as the consequence of the credit


                                                                                                      195




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   195        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     restriction which has already taken place. Nothing should be done
                     to check this tendency” (Niemeyer, October 5, 1921, T 175/5, part 2,
                     fol. 37). This harsh dear money policy coincided with the end of the
                     postwar boom and was certainly the main factor in thrusting the Brit-
                     ish economy to its lowest real GDP of the century in 1921. The slump
                     was severe—the 1919 gains in production and income over their war-
                     time levels were lost within a year and unemployment reached a peak
                     of 18 percent in December 1921 (Howson 1975, 10).
                         What some economists today would characterize as a mistake of
                     economic management had clear political advantages. The evil of un-
                     employment was not so evil for the long-term survival of exploitation,
                     a principle upon which capital accumulation rested. Unemployment
                     weakened workers’ position, silenced demands for greater economic
                     democracy, and guaranteed lower labor costs (see chapter 9). As Cro-
                     nin put it: “The astronomical levels of unemployment in some of the
                     most militant and strike prone industries must have served to lower the
                     expectations of workers and erode the bases of workshop organization”
                     (Cronin 1979, 129). Indeed, technocrats got what they wished for: wages
                     fell tremendously as a consequence of the austerity-induced slump. Av-
                     erage money wages and retail prices plummeted by 30 percent between
                     1920 and 1923, a remarkable degree of flexibility (Peden 1985, 68). The
                     Economist estimated that by 1922 working men lost three-quarters of
                     their wartime wage increases. The loud demands for workers’ manage-
                     ment of just a few years prior were reduced to a whimper. Moreover,
                     the consequent weakening of labor, and the shortage of revenue in the
                     state coffers (due to less tax income during a downturn), provided the
                     political conditions to stifle the reconstructionist plans of expansionary
                     fiscal policies.
                         Once high bank rates deflated domestic prices, those high bank rates
                     had to persist in order to achieve an even costlier objective: returning
                     to the gold standard at the prewar parity of 1914. This amounted to a
                     long haul of deflation, as the sterling needed to be raised from $3.40
                     in 1920 to $4.86 in 1925—a 10 percent price deflation (see Peden 2000,
                     128–89).
                         In fact, after 1921, Hawtrey expressed concern regarding a prolonged


                     196




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   196        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     spell of deflation; however, the concern was never high enough to
                     swing him from his loud advocacy in favor of returning to gold at its
                     prewar par. Once more, Hawtrey made clear how, even if burdensome
                     for the workers, the gold standard meant a protection to those who
                     he thought really counted for capital accumulation: the creditors—“the
                     class of non-speculative investors who play so considerable a part as
                     the sleeping partners of the modern capitalist system” (Hawtrey 1919a,
                     357). For this reason, he explicitly opposed the widespread proposal to
                     restore gold at a lower par; it would have entailed an unquestionable
                     “injustice so long as the capitalist system continues” (ibid.).
                        For the Treasury and the Bank of England, returning to gold, so
                     costly in terms of unemployment and social sacrifice, had a further in-
                     valuable political payoff that was worth any economic sacrifice. The
                     gold standard buttressed the exemption of monetary policy, and conse-
                     quently also of fiscal policy, from political discussion and intervention.
                        This depoliticization of economic matters—or rather, the de-
                     democratization of the economy—guaranteed the system’s prioritiza-
                     tion of capital accumulation, of which monetary and fiscal austerity
                     were necessary elements. More specifically, Treasury officials knew
                     that once monetary policy was linked to the maintenance of a fixed
                     exchange rate, politicians would no longer be free to determine the
                     supply of money or the level of interest rates. The same held true for
                     budgetary policy, as it could not run counter to the constraint of the
                     balance of trade. In this way, the gold standard provided a final in-
                     dissoluble buffer to any expansionary programs. And of course, most
                     important of all, gold would function as a mechanism to permanently
                     discipline workers into accepting lower wages. In the case where they
                     were not going to accept such discipline, the repercussion would be to
                     their own detriment. Clearly, these coercive effects were in the interests
                     not merely of financial capital but of industrial capital as well: they
                     were foundational for an overall rise of profit rates. Indeed, starting in
                     1926 profit rates became much steeper than they had been in the previ-
                     ous five years (increasing from 18 percent to 27 percent between 1926
                     and 1928—see chapter 9, figure 9.3).
                        Niemeyer could not have been more explicit in responding to criti-


                                                                                                      197




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   197        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     cism: “for a time no doubt our current difficulties will be attributed to
                     a return to gold. It is so much easier to do than to grapple with our real
                     problem, how to reduce the cost of production and to cease thinking
                     that we can consume more than we can produce” (T 208/105, fol. 5). As
                     it turns out, Niemeyer’s argument brought things back to where they
                     started: in order to keep credit in check, the golden recipe of lower
                     consumption and greater production prevailed.
                         If the British people were to abstain, then where would demand for
                     British goods come from? Blackett, like his colleagues, had a simple
                     answer: “the fact is that the only form of demand which will really help
                     the situation is demand from abroad. An artificial stimulation of the
                     home demand will merely mean encouraging people in this country
                     to take in each other’s washing and waste their energy in so doing”
                     (Blackett, June 8, 1921, T 175.6, part 1, fol. 15). In this framework, exports
                     were to be at once the driver of economic growth and the key to a virtu-
                     ous balance of payments.
                         Ironically, experts regarded a return to gold not “as a class question”
                     but as a decision taken “from the standpoint of the general interest”
                     (T 208/105, fol. 4); or, in Governor Norman’s grandiose terms, gold rep-
                     resented the interest not of one class of one nation but of the “world.”
                     These thoughts should not come as a surprise, since they are indicative
                     of the austerity logic that is still pervasive today—the underlying as-
                     sumption that rationality itself coincides with the rationality of capital
                     accumulation. There is nothing else as important.
                         With the gold standard, austerity could pass as a technical, natural,
                     and unavoidable mechanism; yet in truth, as we have shown, the gold
                     standard was not an automatic mechanism after all, given that it re-
                     quired austere practices—both to return to it and to maintain it.
                         Hawtrey was very explicit that the gold standard in itself was not
                     sufficient to prevent inflation. His call at the Genoa conference was for
                     a managed standard. The “great Central banks of the world” (“Draft
                     Resolutions,” T 208/28, fol. 5) were to take absolute charge of monetary
                     policy and, in so doing, enjoy full “discretion.” These words, which
                     might at first sight appear innocuous, deserve to be investigated in their
                     full political significance.


                     198




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   198        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story




                     The Technocratic Project

                     Blackett, Niemeyer, and Norman were “fanatically attached” (Sayers
                     1976, 523) to the Genoa doctrine—a vision of technocracy operating at
                     a global scale, where the British model would be followed by the rest
                     of the world.
                         The resolutions of the Genoa conference came from Hawtrey’s pen
                     and are worth recalling: “The return to sound currency will be assisted
                     if reliance is placed on the international cooperation of the banks of
                     issues rather than on direct government action” (“Draft Resolutions,”
                     T 208/28, fol. 2). As “private corporations,” central banks have to be
                     “free from political pressure and should be conducted solely on lines of
                     prudent finances” (T 176/13, fol. 26; T 208/28, fol. 4).
                         These resolutions reveal an unabashed faith in a technocratic proj-
                     ect, one that places the hub of economic decisions in the hands of a
                     body that has absolutely no democratic liability. In this sense, and as
                     Hawtrey explicitly put it, “the Government must answer criticism, for
                     its tenure depends on popular support.” The central bank, on the other
                     hand, “is free to follow the precept: ‘Never explain; never regret; never
                     apologise’” (Hawtrey 1925a, 243).
                         Never apologizing, the neutral expert could act unimpeded to ensure
                     the proper functioning of the market. Though popular among techno-
                     crats, these views were being largely contested and required protection.
                     During the turbulent years of deflation and unemployment, British
                     citizens were not blind to the profound impact monetary policy was
                     having on their lives. In 1925, the Independent Labour Party launched a
                     popular campaign in favor of central bank nationalization. In a frenzy
                     for rebuttal, Hawtrey wrote a full-fledged defense of the technocratic
                     nature of central banks.
                         Monetary management, he declared, is “a technical task which is the
                     field of the expert” (ibid., 239), and thus has to be “made the subject of
                     intensive scientific study of a kind that would be inappropriate to broad
                     political decisions” (ibid.). No exception could be made regarding the
                     requirement “to separate the central bank, as the expert body, from the


                                                                                                      199




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   199        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     executive Government” (ibid.). In Britain, Hawtrey told the reader, the
                     separation had been fully accomplished: “the Bank of England is the
                     property of its share-holders, and the governors and directors are re-
                     sponsible to no one else.” He then added: “It is thoroughly understood,
                     however, that their position is one of trust for the public interest” (ibid.).
                         Undoubtedly, in this framework, what was good for the central bank
                     was also good universally and for the public at large. Any faint doubt
                     that, as a private institution, the central bank could work in favor of the
                     ruling class was strongly disregarded, since “the only defence against in-
                     flation is to be found in the wisdom of the financial world in general, and
                     of Finance Ministries and central banks in particular” (ibid., 240–41).
                         Hawtrey was adamant that it was precisely in a “democratic age” that
                     technocratic exemption from democracy was “an advantage.” One had
                     to escape “ill judged pressure at critical times,” and especially any op-
                     position to deflation on the part of workers and business. Indeed, until
                     “a healthy public opinion could ever be evolved on the subject of credit
                     control”—and Hawtrey declared himself agnostic on whether it would
                     ever be possible—“the welfare of the community” depended “vitally
                     upon the technical efficiency and enlightenment of those who admin-
                     ister the great central banks of the world” (ibid., 244).
                         The eliteness of scientific knowledge thus became the means to jus-
                     tify the undemocratic nature of an institution with immense social
                     power and impact on everyone’s lives. Hawtrey’s innocent parallel be-
                     tween the workings of the central banks—which he admitted would
                     “intimately [affect] the entire economic life of the country”—and
                     the colonial office governing a colony betrays the fundamental anti-
                     democratic or even repressive content of the austerity project.
                         Keynes agreed heartily. He wrote: “My own view is in complete ac-
                     cord with that of Mr. Hawtrey, that this activity is one which should
                     be pursued by a semi-autonomous body not subject to political inter-
                     ference in its daily work” (“Discussion by Prof. J. M. Keynes from the
                     Chair,” in Hawtrey 1925a, 244). The common ambition was impeccable:
                     the economic sector must be depoliticized.
                         It is in the light of this long-term and potentially irreversible project
                     of detaching the economic from the political that one should under-


                     200




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   200        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     stand the effort of Hawtrey, Blackett, and Niemeyer to get rid of the
                     anomalous wartime involvement of the Treasury in monetary policy,
                     whereby as Bradbury recalled, “the Bank would have to regard itself as
                     a department of the Treasury and he [Lord Cunliffe, Governor of the
                     Bank] always took the line of receiving orders from the Chancellor of
                     the Exchequer.” The austere fiscal agenda of the Treasury, especially in
                     the form of redeeming the floating debt, had a precise political signifi-
                     cance: it allowed the Bank of England to gain back its full autonomous
                     control over monetary policy.
                        On February 17, 1929, now in his role as director of the Bank of En-
                     gland, Blackett proudly testified his past efforts: “I arranged with the
                     Chancellor of the Exchequer soon after April 1920 to revert to the pre-
                     war practice of either not informing the Chancellor of the Exchequer
                     in advance of an intended change in the bank-rate or letting him know
                     only at about 10:30 or 11 of the Thursday” (T 176/13, fol. 25). As a gov-
                     ernment representative, the chancellor did not have, and ought not to
                     have, any official role with respect to the bank rate. Setting the bank
                     rate, Niemeyer commented, was to be the decision of a “private corpo-
                     ration” (T 176/13, fol. 26).
                        As a private corporation, the Bank could put economic priorities
                     over all social concerns; in the meantime, the Treasury could happily
                     escape all accountability for the social sacrifice, especially in the form
                     of unemployment, that austerity measures were inflicting on the British
                     population.
                        When, in March 1921, Chancellor Chamberlain was asked about
                     the “vital importance of this fall in Bank rates upon unemployment,
                     which is the most vital question we have to consider today,” he batted it
                     away, saying, “the price of money is wholly outside government action”
                     (T 176/13, fols. 9–10). Two years later, upon similar contestation, the
                     secretary of the Treasury, Sir William Joynson-Hicks, blatantly stated:
                     “in accordance both with the tradition in this country and the unani-
                     mous advice of experts at the Brussels and Genoa Conferences, control
                     of the Bank Rate rests with the Central Bank and not with the Govern-
                     ment” (T 176/13, fol. 10). In March 1925, Chancellor Churchill defended
                     the “depoliticized” deflationary policies as a matter of etiquette: “I think


                                                                                                      201




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   201        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     it would be an inconvenient practice if the Chancellor of the Exchequer
                     were to set the precedent of expressing approval or disapproval of de-
                     cisions taken at any time by the Bank of England” (T 176/13, fol. 11).
                         The message was clear: political criticism had no place under tech-
                     nocracy. Niemeyer and Blackett further exercised great effort in sowing
                     this austere ideology outside of Europe. In his mission to India, Blackett
                     succeeded in creating an independent central bank (which commenced
                     its operations in 1935), while Niemeyer found success in Brazil (in 1931)
                     and Argentina (in 1935), where governments established central banks
                     under his blueprint.
                         In his notes to convince the Brazilian government to abide by these
                     technocratic principles, Niemeyer used his old talking points. He ad-
                     monished that, if technocratic independence was not institutionalized,
                     “political considerations and the pecuniary exigencies of the Govern-
                     ment rather than considerations of sound monetary economy are likely
                     to sooner or later become dominant. . . . The risk of excess issues, infla-
                     tion, and depreciation of the currency is constant” (Niemeyer 1931, 17).
                     To avoid such outright disaster, of course the solution was a no-brainer:
                     the central bank must be “an entirely private Commercial undertaking”
                     (ibid., 18), led by private agents independent of any sort of political
                     representation. The technocratic counteroffensive that began in Britain
                     had by this time established itself on a global scale.
                         Technocracy as the rule of experts had as its basis an assumption of
                     epistemic superiority. In this sense, the experts were the guardians of
                     untarnished objective knowledge on how to properly stabilize credit
                     and run the market economy. As we have explored in depth in the pre-
                     ceding pages, such knowledge prescribed the austerity motto—produce
                     more and consume less. Hence, it emerges that austerity was not only
                     an anti-democratic project, but, at its core, a repressive one: it forced
                     people to sacrifice without criticism.

                     Conclusion

                     This chapter explored how austerity was an anti-democratic and funda-
                     mentally repressive project emerging out of an epoch of unprecedented


                     202




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   202        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                          austerity, a british story


                     democratic demands. In a moment when the scope of social alterna-
                     tives broadened and citizens were no longer willing to sacrifice their
                     livelihoods in the name of economic rigor, experts deployed Hawtreyan
                     economics to impose on people ever greater sacrifice for the purpose of
                     stabilizing the economy.
                        Sacrifice came in the double form of decreased consumption (which
                     would reduce internal demand and prices) and decreased wages (which
                     would reduce costs) to boost production and economic competitive-
                     ness. Such was the “recipe for the long-term general interest.”
                        A fundamental step in this direction was to depoliticize the
                     economy—that is, to abolish any form of state control so that wages
                     would again be subject to impersonal market pressure rather than be
                     prone to political contestation. Looking closely, it emerges that the fixa-
                     tion of the experts on balanced budgets and on curbing inflation had
                     a deeper goal: reconfiguring the indisputability of capitalist relations of
                     production, based (as we know) on the pillars of private property and
                     wage relations.
                        Indeed, the Treasury and the Bank of England prolonged their dear-
                     money policies even after inflation was curtailed. Furthermore, the
                     British state did not loosen its fiscal belt even after budgetary surplus
                     was achieved in 1920. The austerity-induced downturn and consequent
                     unemployment was no economic mistake, but rather a powerful means
                     to cool the collective temperature of an embattled working class, to cre-
                     ate the pathway to dismantle reconstructionist plans and shift resources
                     to the creditor classes of society.
                        The British experts were of course aware of the non-neutral class
                     impact of austerity. A 1920 memorandum of the Bank of England read:
                     “The process of deflation of prices which may be expected to follow
                     on the check to the expansion of credit must necessarily be a painful
                     one to some classes of the community, but this is unavoidable” (Bank
                     Memorandum, February 10, 1920, T 172/1384, fol. 30b). These lines dis-
                     close how austerity proceeded to normalize class repression through
                     the idea of “unavoidable” and “natural” economic truths that only our
                     experts could deliver.
                        Protest, however, did not easily subside. The normalization of sac-


                                                                                                     203




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   203        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     rifice required a further process of depoliticization: the insulation of
                     economic policies from any form of public scrutiny. The ideal was an
                     economy run by “expert guidance free from political interference”
                     (Blackett 1931). The main contribution of Hawtreyan economics was
                     to fortify the concept of monetary management (or austere manage-
                     ment) of the market economy and to assign managerial command to a
                     technocratic institution. As a private body, Hawtrey told us, the Bank of
                     England was “free” to inflict austerity without ever having to “explain,”
                     “regret,” or “apologise.” In this sense it emerges that there was nothing
                     more political than the technocratic mission to depoliticize.
                         Audacious as the British case may be, it had little on the Italian ex-
                     perience of austerity, where its political and repressive nature was ever
                     more glaring in its weddedness to Fascism.




                     204




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   204        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 7

                     Austerity, an Italian Story




                            The directives of domestic policies are summed up in these words: thrift,
                            work, discipline. The financial problem is crucial: the budget has to be
                            balanced as soon as possible. Austerity regime: spending intelligently: the
                            support to the productive forces of the Nation: ending all war controls and
                            state interferences.

                            Benito Mussolini, first speech in Parliament on November 16, 1922 (in Mus-
                            solini 1933, 22)



                     Following months during which Fascist squads waged violent attacks
                     on leftist opposition, Benito Mussolini officially seized power on Octo-
                     ber 29, 1922. More than a coup, Mussolini’s infamous March on Rome
                     was a ceremonial display of strength: Italy’s Fascist leader had been
                     called upon by King Vittorio Emanuele III to resolve the postwar po-
                     litical crisis, and Mussolini had executed his orders.
                         In his first speech in Parliament as the newly nominated prime min-
                     ister, Mussolini spoke the language of austerity: “thrift, work, disci-
                     pline,” he said, pledging to depoliticize the nation’s economy by putting
                     an end to all “state interferences.”
                         Mussolini delivered on his promises. Fiscal and industrial austerity
                     (1922–1925), followed by monetary austerity and continued industrial
                     austerity (1926–1928), bulldozed hard-won social reforms and work-
                     ers’ aspirations. These policies served to enact a common purpose: the
                     rehabilitation of the fundamental pillars of capital accumulation—


                                                                                                           205




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   205        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.               6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     nowhere better observed than in the regime’s capacity to secure brisk
                     “industrial peace.” A year into the new regime, the minister of finance,
                     Alberto De Stefani, could toast to labor’s defeat: “In 1920/21 the loss
                     through strikes was 8,201,000 working days and in 1921/1922 7,336,000
                     days. From 1st November 1922 to 31st October 1923 the loss has been
                     only 247,000 [days—a 97 percent drop in two years]. Profits and rev-
                     enues are increasing” (Summary of Financial Statement, Italian Senate,
                     December 8, 1923, FO 371/8887, fol. 68).
                         Austerity required Fascism—a strong, top-down government
                     that could impose its nationalist will coercively and with political
                     impunity—for its prompt success. Fascism, conversely, required aus-
                     terity to solidify its rule. Indeed, it was the draw of austerity that led
                     the international and domestic liberal establishments to support Mus-
                     solini’s government even after the Leggi Fascistissime [literally: “very
                     Fascist Laws”] of 1925–1926 that installed Mussolini as the nation’s of-
                     ficial dictator. Liberal experts in Italy, Britain, and the United States
                     were quick in observing that a central strongman with “full powers”
                     was the most effective means of safeguarding Italian capitalism from
                     its multifaceted “enemies.” While chapter 8 explores the international
                     appeal of Fascist austerity, this chapter delves into the intimate associa-
                     tion between Italian liberals and authoritarianism—a connection with
                     which the canonical literature has failed to grapple.
                         Austerity’s Italian enablers were some of the country’s best-
                     established economists and champions of the emerging paradigm of
                     pure economics—a direct precursor of today’s mainstream neoclassical
                     economics. Two of them, Alberto De Stefani and Maffeo Pantaleoni,
                     were prominent Fascists. The other two, Umberto Ricci and Luigi Ein-
                     audi, identified as liberal. They joined forces—and found notable com-
                     mon ground—under the banner of austerity. For each, austerity served
                     a highly functional role: it was both the expression of a system of domi-
                     nation and a means of reinforcing it.
                         These economists’ facilitation of austerity (and accordingly, their
                     support of Fascism) leaves an important question: how much were
                     their austerity policies motivated by the principles of pure economics,
                     and how much was tied to their political participation in Italy’s class


                     206




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   206        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     war? Also: was pure economics really so pure? Or was it rather that
                     it had at its foundation a profoundly classist disposition? If no defini-
                     tive answer can be given, certainly an investigation into the thoughts
                     and actions of these four economists can provide insights to illuminate
                     these questions.
                         None of this is to claim that the intellectual antecedent of today’s
                     mainstream economics was the only driver for 1920s Fascist economic
                     policy; nationalism and the safeguarding of financial-industrial inter-
                     ests are also to blame, and they are both extensively discussed in the
                     literature. On the other hand, the drivers that will be explored here—
                     economic expertise and austerity—have been wholly disregarded or
                     ignored. Perhaps this is because of the light they might shed on the
                     repressive nature of today’s economic science.
                         A focus on austerity also offers a new lens to historically evaluate
                     Italian Fascism and its economic agenda. Indeed, while traditional
                     historiography stresses the discontinuity between the first laissez-faire
                     period (1922–1925) and the corporativist period that followed (with the
                     latter usually understood as the real expression of Fascism), I suggest
                     that a continuity can be drawn between the two: austerity. Whatever its
                     historiographic period, austerity was always much more than laissez-
                     faire; it embodied the active intervention of the state against capitalist
                     crisis.

                     The Experts in Power

                     On December 3, 1922, only a month after the formation of his new cabi-
                     net, Mussolini issued a royal decree granting full powers to his govern-
                     ment for the reform of the tax system and public administration. It
                     inaugurated the so-called Period of Full Powers, which endowed Italian
                     economic experts with unencumbered authority to foist austerity mea-
                     sures on the Italian public.
                        Alberto De Stefani, Maffeo Pantaleoni, Umberto Ricci, and Luigi
                     Einaudi were successful professors of economics who traveled in the
                     highest academic circles. The four professors were (or eventually be-
                     came) members of the Accademia dei Lincei, the nation’s most pres-


                                                                                                     207




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   207        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     tigious honorary institution for scholars. Their commitment to aca-
                     demic debates at national and international levels was complemented
                     by a deep engagement in current affairs. The four professors regularly
                     partook in policy discussions and contributed to domestic and foreign
                     newspapers. The degree of their involvement in actual policy making,
                     however, varied.
                        The stern-faced Alberto De Stefani took the lead in shaping Fascist
                     economic legislation. In 1921, at age 42, after the violent militancy at the
                     dawn of the Fascist movement, he became a member of parliament as
                     member of the Fascist Party. The circumstances of his transition into
                     electoral politics signaled the strength of his commitment to Fascism:
                     rather than identifying as a member of the “National Bloc,” a coalition
                     that included Liberals and nationalists, he demanded and was granted
                     identity solely as a Fascist. He became the sole Fascist deputy elected in
                     1921, representing his hometown of Vicenza. From then on, his politi-
                     cal career skyrocketed. Two days after the March on Rome, the king
                     called on Mussolini to create a new government. Mussolini nominated
                     De Stefani to run the Ministry of Finance, which soon merged with the
                     Ministry of Treasury (Royal Decree 1700, December 31, 1922, in Cam-
                     era dei Deputati 1929). De Stefani held that position of power until June
                     1925, pushing for unprecedented austerity under his constant motto:
                     “nothing for nothing: for every hundred billion of greater state income,
                     a hundred billion less expenditures” [“niente per niente”; per ogni cento
                     milioni di maggiori entrate, cento milioni di minori spese] (De Stefani
                     1926b, 8). During those years of fervidly sowing a new national eco-
                     nomic identity, De Stefani’s closest technical advisors were two of his
                     most admired colleagues: Pantaleoni, his primary mentor; and Ricci,
                     who had been a guide and supporter of De Stefani’s academic career.
                        A founder of pure economics as a school of thought, Pantaleoni
                     was surely the most renowned Italian economist at the time. His fame
                     extended worldwide, and his classic book Principi di economia pura
                     (1889) had been translated into English in 1898. Pantaleoni shared
                     the spotlight with the famous founders of the neoclassical-economic
                     movement, including William Stanley Jevons, Hermann Heinrich
                     Gossen, Alfred Marshall, and Léon Walras. Pantaleoni’s magnum opus


                     208




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   208        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     represented a true methodological turning point for economic studies
                     in Italy, paving the way for much of today’s standard theory (Barucci
                     1980) and inspiring generations of younger economists (including the
                     polymath Vilfredo Pareto, who helped evolve economics from a philo-
                     sophical field to a more quantitative one; the two became close friends
                     and collaborators). As we know from chapter 5, Pantaleoni’s reputation
                     for rigor is what earned him a post among the selected advisors at the
                     Brussels Financial Conference of 1920.
                         His political career was just as intense. A parliamentarian in the
                     early 1900s and a committed Nationalist, Pantaleoni eagerly joined the
                     Fascist movement upon its inception in March 1919; in 1920 he joined
                     the leader Gabriele D’Annunzio in the irredentist occupation of the
                     Croatian town of Fiume, where Pantaleoni briefly helmed the Ministry
                     of Finance. In 1923 the Fascist regime rewarded his accomplishments
                     with a seat at the Senate. Here Pantaleoni’s collaborations with Min-
                     ister De Stefani became more intense. Ricci described his colleague’s
                     eagerness to work for austerity policies: “Pantaleoni was a spotless and
                     fearless citizen, a champion of many battles, which sometimes provided
                     him with bitter enemies. . . . I had the fortune to collaborate with him
                     in more than one commission, in particular the one for the reduction
                     of public expenditures in Italy, that had him as president. I saw him
                     work without pause, day and night” (Ricci 1939, 19). Pantaleoni’s po-
                     litical influence and scholarly international fame were at their peak at
                     the time of his death in 1924.
                         Despite being perhaps the most committed liberal of the four, the be-
                     spectacled Ricci was crucial for the growth of Fascist economic policy.
                     In 1923, Mussolini sent a letter to the minister of education, Giovanni
                     Gentile, personally asking for the young Ricci’s recusal from many of
                     his duties as a professor in order to serve the government full-time. A
                     1925 memorandum of the Ministry of Finance summarizes Ricci’s fer-
                     vent activity in those years:

                        Professor Umberto Ricci, successor of Pantaleoni in the chair of politi-
                        cal economy at the Royal University of Rome, has been at the disposal
                        of His Excellency, the Minister of Finance, from June 1923 to February


                                                                                                     209




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   209        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                        1925. During this period Professor Ricci, apart from taking part in com-
                        missions of less importance has carried out his activity 1) as a member of
                        the Commissione Censuaria Centrale; 2) as member of the Commission
                        for the Revision of Balances and the Reduction of Public Expenditure;
                        3) as member first and then president of the investigative committee for
                        the technical organization of the Ministry of Finance. Moreover, Profes-
                        sor Ricci was a member of a) the board of directors of the National Rail-
                        ways and b) the board of directors of the National Institute of Insurance
                        (Istituto Nazionale delle Assicurazioni).


                     Ricci acted with determination: as we shall see, the national railways
                     were among the institutions most affected by cuts, while the Fascist
                     government also privatized the National Institute of Insurance. But
                     Ricci proved to be more austere than even Fascism could satisfy. In
                     the name of a strict defense of austerity, he ended his service to the
                     government in February 1925. Indeed, the polemic that distanced Ricci
                     from the regime had little to do with breaching political freedom and
                     everything to do with breaching “economic freedom”—the freedom of
                     the market. This rift escalated in 1928, costing Ricci his academic post
                     in Italy. At age 46, he relocated to Egypt to continue his scholarly life
                     as an academic in Cairo, where he also played a role as government ad-
                     visor. In a 1941 pamphlet the professor proudly recalled holding a seat
                     in the Egyptian Fiscal Commission, giving influential speeches, and re-
                     porting in Egypt’s major newspapers “to illuminate the Egyptian public
                     opinion on institutions of greater financial control.” The expert’s mis-
                     sion was to transplant the Italian and British austerity frameworks, and
                     especially to build an “independent organ to keep finances in check”
                     (Ricci 1941, 53).
                        The last of the four economists was the prestigious liberal profes-
                     sor Luigi Einaudi, an Italian senator since 1919 and one of Mussolini’s
                     initial candidates for the position of minister of treasury. Though the
                     final offer never materialized, and in fact Einaudi never served in the
                     Fascist government, he still played a crucial role in building consensus
                     for Fascist austerity at home and abroad. After the 1924 murder of the
                     socialist politician Giacomo Matteotti, Einaudi opposed Fascism po-


                     210




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   210        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     litically; however, based on his interventions in the Liberal newspaper
                     Il corriere della sera, and especially his copious work as a correspondent
                     for the Economist, Einaudi’s fervent support of Fascist economic policy
                     throughout the 1920s is undeniable.
                         After Fascism was defeated in the second world war, Einaudi be-
                     came the leading representative of the Liberal Party in the Italian Con-
                     stitutional Assembly (1946) and was Italy’s first elected president of the
                     Republic (1948–1955). In these roles he embodied a tacit institutional
                     continuity between the establishment that had supported the rise of
                     the dictatorship and the new democratic republic. To this day, Einaudi
                     is revered as one of the most respectable public figures in Italy. Univer-
                     sities, avenues, and cultural foundations across the country bear his
                     name. In addition to the University of Turin, during his life Einaudi
                     also taught at Bocconi University, fortifying its long-lasting legacy as a
                     hub of neoclassical economics; even today Bocconi remains the home
                     institution for influential austerity hawks. For example, the economist
                     Mario Monti, the long-standing president of the university, led the “tear
                     and blood” austerity reforms in his role as a non-elected prime minis-
                     ter of Italy between 2011 and 2013. There is also Francesco Giavazzi,
                     who as of 2022 is the economic advisor of Mario Draghi’s non-elected
                     technocratic government and who, together with his famous colleague
                     Alberto Alesina and other so-called “Bocconi boys,” advised European
                     and international institutions—such as the Ecofin (the Economic and
                     Financial Affairs Council, made up of the economic and finance min-
                     isters from all European member states), the ECB, and the IMF—to
                     commit to austerity after the 2009 financial crisis.
                         Einaudi’s relationship to Fascism—including his persisting support
                     of the austerity that the Fascist government enacted—has been down-
                     played, if not forgotten, in contemporary histories and narratives. How-
                     ever, his relationship to it raises one of the main themes of this book.
                     Ricci and Einaudi—celebrated as Italy’s most authentic ambassadors
                     of liberalism—had one priority during the postwar crisis: deploying
                     austerity to guard the market economy against an imminent collapse.
                     Such austerity was embodied in the Fascist policies of the 1920s, with
                     repressive politics as an integral component. Ricci and Einaudi didn’t


                                                                                                      211




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   211        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     have to declare loyalty to Fascism to be of service to it; austerity weaved
                     Fascism and liberalism together in a shared, coercive pursuit.
                        If one focuses on these four men’s economic beliefs, the ideologi-
                     cal differences between the two Fascists and the two Liberals disap-
                     pear. Their contemporaries seemed aware of this connection. In 1921
                     De Stefani himself declared to the Fascist newspaper Il popolo d’Italia:

                           I would, for example, bestow the Fascist membership card to Vilfredo
                           Pareto, to Maffeo Pantaleoni, to Umberto Ricci, to Luigi Einaudi. The
                           Fascist Vademecum is exactly in the works of these men; it would be
                           good if Fascists were educated in their works in order to acquire that
                           bright unity of thought that must guide intelligent actions. (De Stefani,
                           “L’orientamento del Fascismo secondo il pensiero di Alberto De’ Stefani,”
                           Il popolo d’Italia, September 21, 1921, 3, interview by Mario Zamboni)


                     Once in office, De Stefani confirmed these views in an open letter in Il
                     popolo addressed to his “illustrious friend,” Luigi Einaudi:

                           When my young and bold comrades ask me how to develop a Fascist
                           mentality, also in the technical field of social, economic and financial
                           problems, I direct them to the works of four great Italian Fascists, who
                           are non-militant and without a party card: Vilfredo Pareto, Maffeo Pan-
                           taleoni, Umberto Ricci and “last but not the least” Luigi Einaudi, whom
                           I plead my comrades to forgive if he propagandizes for Fascism on the
                           columns of the Corriere della sera. (De Stefani, “The Financial Program
                           of the National-Socialist Party, Open Letter to Senator Luigi Einaudi,” Il
                           popolo d’Italia, January 14, 1922)


                     Were these unwarranted associations? Political opportunism? Popular
                     interpretations and commentaries usually argue “yes.” The remain-
                     der of this chapter explores how these forgiving characterizations are
                     incorrect—and how, on the contrary, De Stefani’s descriptions were
                     based on his peers’ austerity bona fides. These foundations are evident
                     in their actions and journalistic and academic writings. Indeed, theirs
                     is a set of cases in which political and academic endeavors—two lanes


                     212




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   212        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     that scholars usually evaluate separately—are in profound harmony.
                     With these four economists as their ambassadors, austerity policies
                     found useful means of dissemination in the communication of eco-
                     nomic theory. Indeed, the dual motto of austerity—consume less and
                     produce more—was driven by these economists’ will to implement and
                     “make real” the ideal models of a virtuous, capitalist society that pre-
                     supposes the subordination of the working class.

                     Pure Economics and the Technocratic Project

                     In their efforts to restore the primacy of capital accumulation, Alberto
                     De Stefani, Maffeo Pantaleoni, Umberto Ricci, and Luigi Einaudi faced
                     two battles.
                        The first, which had already begun at the turn of the century, pro-
                     ceeded within the realm of academia. The four economists joined
                     forces with their Switzerland-based colleague, Pareto, in a lengthy and
                     successful campaign to subvert the Italian historical tradition of eco-
                     nomic thought, acting instead “to do justice against all false schools
                     and proclaim pure economics sovereign” (Ricci 1939, 44). To this end,
                     Pantaleoni’s purchase and management of Il giornale degli economisti—
                     the most influential journal of economics in Italy—in 1910 was a crucial
                     step toward building the hegemony of a new scientific paradigm.
                        In parallel, the four men battled strenuously to shape public opin-
                     ion at a moment in which it had “gone astray.” After the war this sec-
                     ond battle took primacy. Indeed, in the wake of World War I the un-
                     thinkable was upon them: capitalist values and social relations—the
                     very preconditions for pure economics to exist as canon—had to be
                     defended from the incursions of society at large.
                        Regarding the effort to fend off the masses, Ricci spoke of econo-
                     mists as “struggling to make the public understand that trains could
                     not depart to the moon.” The public, the economists claimed, were
                     uneducated about economic truths and thus acted against their own
                     interests. Alas, these economic truths had been mined by experts in
                     such exquisite terms that they were “no longer intelligible,” not only to
                     the masses but to any non-specialist, including parliament deputies. It


                                                                                                      213




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   213        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     was the lofty status of pure economics that lent a superior aura to its
                     practitioners, who were burdened with the arduous task of educating
                     humanity regarding correct economic behavior in order to bring about
                     economic equilibrium and progress. As Ricci explained, the economist
                     acted selflessly for the good of the whole. In this crusade he sacrificed
                     his “interest as individual, group or class to the interest of the collec-
                     tive” (Ricci 1926, 2). The pedagogic mission was, in Pantaleoni’s mind,
                     so “great and difficult” that it required “much work, exceptional en-
                     ergy, indomitable civil courage and subtle acumen” as well as access
                     to a newspaper that is “greatly diffused and financially independent”
                     (Pantaleoni 1922, 222).
                         Ricci gave two important speeches on the matter. The one he de-
                     livered in Pisa, for the opening of the academic year 1921–1922, was
                     titled “The Alleged Decline of Political Economy” [Il preteso tramonto
                     dell’economia politica]. The other, which he gave at the University of
                     Bologna in January 1922, was titled “The Unpopularity of Political
                     Economy” [L’impopolarità dell’economia politica]. On both occasions
                     he conceded that ignorant and opportunistic masses hated economists
                     and viewed them as public enemies (Ricci 1926, 72). He couched the
                     public’s disdain as resentment—economists, after all, were the thing
                     keeping society from collapsing under its own indolence: “By pro-
                     claiming the principle of universal taxation, promoting the shutdown
                     of useless public offices, the dismissal of redundant employees, the
                     abandonment of public works, the economist surely doesn’t make new
                     friends” (Ricci 1926, 102).
                         An economist should never be discouraged, Ricci cautioned, be-
                     cause an economist is the purest human force:

                           Not always [the economist’s] words are listened to, not always the con-
                           science of accomplishing his duty is accompanied by the joy of the re-
                           sult. But if sometimes he is affected by the sorrow of having spoken in
                           vain, a reward awaits him, one that no human force may subtract from
                           him. As he progressively climbs the ivory tower, and abandons at each
                           floor his prejudices and interests, his vision gets ever more refined, his
                           horizon is enlarged; eventually, when the high summit is reached, he


                     214




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   214        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                        discovers the unity in the truth, the order in the disorder . . . and the
                        spectacle from the high tower becomes even more marvelous when, in
                        the exchanges among firms, groups, classes and nations, one is capable
                        of distilling rigorous and elegant laws, worthy of competing with the laws
                        of celestial mechanics. This vision of beauty is the economist’s sovereign
                        reward. (Ricci 1926, 104–5, my italics)


                     All four of austerity’s Italian economists shared this intellectually elitist
                     position, not to mention a tendency toward self-adulation. It was a set
                     of conceits expressed through Ricci’s religious metaphor, by which the
                     “contemplation” of “the divine science” of economics is “the privilege
                     of the few” and “does not always appear as beautiful, true and good to
                     the profane public” (Ricci 1926, 72).
                        Pure economics is imbued with this manner of positivism. (I use the
                     present tense here with a nod to how this continues with present-day
                     neoclassical theory.) Over time, the discipline achieved a reputation for
                     rigor and epistemic legitimacy that equaled that of other hard sciences.
                     In Ricci’s evocative words: “The socialist and the protectionist are to
                     the economist like the astrologist to the astronomer, the alchemist to
                     the chemist, the sorcerer to the doctor” (Ricci 1926, 25). De Stefani
                     and Ricci paid homage to their teacher Pantaleoni; they hailed him as
                     “an archangel with a flaming sword,” battling against all historicism to
                     proclaim that “there must be a theoretical part of economic science,
                     a nucleus of doctrines, that are independent of opinions, as well as of
                     ethical, political and religious predilections. Something similar to phys-
                     ics and mathematics . . . this is ‘Pure Economics’” (Ricci 1939, 44).
                        In 1923 De Stefani recounted his exhilaration on first discovering
                     pure economics when he read Pantaleoni’s Principles and Pareto’s Cours
                     d’economie in a bookstore: “I was seduced by an analysis in which the
                     useful and the harmful, the pleasure and pain and all the most complex
                     facts of our economic order were conducted through calculus formu-
                     lae and described through graphic representations. . . . The equilibria
                     became intersection points of curve systems and numbers that resolved
                     systems of equations. The human spirit found quietude in those formal
                     truths” (De Stefani 1923, 1187). Economists proclaimed the objective


                                                                                                      215




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   215        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     status of pure economics through a forceful, highly narrated separation
                     of society’s economic and political realms. They drew a strict boundary
                     line: the economic is transcendent, an isolated system in abstraction from
                     other elements of the sociopolitical sphere. In this way, pure economists
                     diverted their gaze from historical questions like the origins of property
                     ownership or class relations; these things were understood as falling
                     outside the economist’s domain, and considered naturally occurring
                     givens. Economists’ claims of objectivity are fortified by their quanti-
                     tative methods: numbers can’t lie, so how can economics?
                        Pure economics aspired to be something like the Platonic form of
                     social inquiry. Just as ideas for Plato were the authentic essence of exist-
                     ing phenomena, so too economic ideas were more real than reality it-
                     self. They were the true model, the archetype that reality played out. Its
                     self-described “purity” did not stem from a detachment from the real
                     world; to the contrary, economics had an undeniable and practical end
                     game. Like Plato’s philosopher, the economist had to return to the cave
                     and rescue the unenlightened from their ignorance. The four profes-
                     sors had as their ambition to eradicate the impurities of the real world
                     so that it would conform to the purity of their mathematical models.
                        Ricci summarized the famous passages of Pantaleoni’s Principles that
                     center economic theory as a prerequisite for policy making:

                           First of all, one must be well-read in pure economics, then trained in
                           applied economics, that is, pure theory; finally, one can embark on the
                           resolution of concrete economic problems, that is, the peculiar and con-
                           tingent issues that everyday reality puts under our eyes and whose core
                           is economics. (Ricci 1939, 45–46)


                     More explicitly, models and theorems had not only to dispense practi-
                     cal economic knowledge; they had to command people’s obedience. As
                     Ricci spelled out: “It is the honest desire of any good theorist of political
                     economy that theoretical constructions be deemed not merely a luxury
                     of the intellect, but necessary to explain and forecast events, and essen-
                     tial to tame men” (“ammaestrare gli uomini,” Ricci 1908, 389, my italics).



                     216




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   216        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     After the war it was indeed the majority of citizens that required tam-
                     ing, since they had revolted against the authentic essence of things.
                        The models of these four economists captured just such an es-
                     sence—a society in which capital, not labor, was the engine of the eco-
                     nomic machine.

                     The Virtuous Saver and the Unruly Worker

                     In 1920 Luigi Einaudi wrote a polemic in the Liberal newspaper Il cor-
                     riere della sera bemoaning Marxist economists and their labor theory
                     of value: “Why should a capitalist profit only because the machine is
                     his? Why shall he live without doing anything? Is it not obvious that his
                     profit comes from the exploitation of someone else’s labour?” he asked,
                     sarcastically. “This is the celebrated and vulgar sophism of Marx’s Capi-
                     tal. . . . But it is enough to ask: how much would be produced if the
                     savers did not produce capital? The answer: nothing. Without capital,
                     labour produces zero.”
                         De Stefani offered a similar explanation to his students: “Capitalism
                     is the phenomenon of a class that lives on the specific productivity of
                     capital, it depends on the right of property and heredity, not on a sub-
                     traction at the expense of the workers.” It was, he specified, “a result of
                     savings and conservation, useful actually to the very working classes”
                     (De Stefani 1919, 164).
                         At a moment when workers endorsed economic theories that put la-
                     bor as the source of capital formation, these highly visible national ex-
                     perts championed an opposing set of theories: it was actually the saver-
                     investors who held the keys that propelled the system. In this manner,
                     economists provided scientific grounds to naturalize a class society—
                     and thus to justify its inevitability, and ultimately its fairness. They did
                     so by equating the members of the bourgeoisie with the concept of the
                     homo economicus—a rational agent who acted out of self-interest.
                         A mathematical notion of economic virtue—still used in neoclassi-
                     cal models today—lent rigor to Ricci’s analysis: a so-called virtual cost
                     of economic abstinence. It is measured, then and now, by the subjective




                                                                                                      217




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   217        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     discount rate, which is based on the psychological rule that, all other
                     things being equal, goods now are preferred over goods in the future.
                     In this thinking, a virtuous agent will have a lower subjective rate of
                     interest and will be more prone to save:

                           The subjective discount rate is low for men who have an acute foresight
                           ability and can vividly foresee future joys and needs, for energetic and
                           disciplined men, who can endure the restraints they impose on them-
                           selves . . . for men raised with sober customs. All these moral virtues—
                           farsightedness, self-control, love for your offspring, moderate habits—
                           together with the certainty of a long life—may render the discount rate
                           extraordinarily small. (Ricci 1999, 33)


                     Indeed, in this individual-virtue framework, any economic agent could
                     potentially practice the virtuous behavior of the homo economicus. But
                     the reality, at least according to Ricci, is that “amongst the tools with
                     which man elevates his degree of civilization, individual abstinence
                     [l’astinenza] is both the most effective and the least widespread” (Ricci
                     1999, 7). Indeed, only a select few had the propensity to abstain, to live
                     within their means, and few actually did: “The businessman is thrifty, a
                     thinker and a calculator, it is this real man who most resembles the ab-
                     stract man pictured by economists, who does not fuss like a sissy [don-
                     nicciuola] of a hardship to come” (Ricci 1999, 23). Pantaleoni agreed
                     emphatically that unlike others, the entrepreneur was not a “sissy.” He
                     spoke of the entrepreneur’s virtues in evolutionary terms: the ability
                     to preserve the species through rational self-interested behavior. It was
                     the entrepreneurs who “realise almost perfectly the type of the homo
                     economicus, and who therefore know, and take advantage, of every
                     opportunity that presents itself of earning a profit” (Pantaleoni 1898,
                     259). Examining these ideas together, neither Pantaleoni nor Ricci en-
                     visioned a clear-cut conceptual distinction between the saver and the
                     entrepreneur: both roles embodied rational economic agents by virtue
                     of maximizing their individual utility.
                         This core conceptual murkiness squares well with the economists’



                     218




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   218        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     adherence to Say’s law, an economic principle that was scripture, too,
                     among British experts of the era. According to Say’s law, all savings in
                     an economy are transformed into productive investment. For Panta-
                     leoni, this transformation was exactly what the capitalist process was
                     all about, and it was foundational to society’s economic progress (see
                     Pantaleoni 1923). In this sense, for pure economists, the self-interest of
                     the homo economicus, whether in the form of the saver or the entre-
                     preneur, personifies the interest of society as a whole. In Pantaleoni’s
                     and his colleagues’ models the market economy benefited everyone: the
                     optimal performance of economic relations, delivering optimal results
                     with respect to prices, quantities, and the allocation of resources and
                     commodities.
                         Accordingly, private savings and private accumulation never clashed
                     with the general interest. On the contrary, public interest depends on
                     these private “virtues.” These principles remain embedded in the stan-
                     dard economics textbooks of today; they are so ingrained that our pro-
                     tagonists’ exhaustive defense of them seems overboard.
                         On the other hand, Pantaleoni’s public interventions demonstrated
                     his belief that the economic status of the working classes reflected their
                     lack of social and economic merits: “all considered, it seems obvi-
                     ous that the classes with lower incomes are significantly deficient in
                     qualities with respect to others. So that this deficiency [deficienza] is
                     the cause of the lower income and not the lower income the cause of the
                     deficiency” (Pantaleoni 1922, 36). Members of the working classes were
                     such because they suffered from incurable vices, such as wasteful con-
                     sumption, and were hangers-on to a more perfect economic system
                     populated by savers. Being poor or working-class was a choice and a
                     pathology.
                         Pantaleoni’s characterization of the Italian working class was con-
                     spicuous in its timing: war had brought “undeserved” wealth to the
                     Italian workers thanks to higher nominal wages and government price
                     controls on foodstuffs and other social services. In Pantaleoni’s telling
                     these same workers, rather than saving, had indulged themselves to a
                     point of moral and economic degradation (1922, 58):



                                                                                                      219




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   219        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                        The working classes basically don’t save and spend everything in plea-
                        sures [godimenti], with the consequence of a remarkable decay of their
                        moral qualities. . . . This is the outcome, first, of the pressure of the war,
                        and, then, of the pressure of socialism and Bolshevism. This state of
                        affairs will necessarily lead to collapse, because it is exasperating [paras-
                        sitico] to capitalism and an obstacle to new savings and the growth of
                        production.


                     He reiterated, this time with evocative imagery and with a further nod
                     to the insidious influence of the Russian Revolution:

                        Thanks to Bolshevism, the modesty in the standard of living that char-
                        acterized Italians has vanished. It has disappeared in both the working
                        class and the peasantry. It is disgusting to witness the masses of workers
                        that are drunk in all our cities . . . the notable increase of wages was not
                        accompanied by greater civilization so that the worker and his spouse
                        live like pigs [porci] in their homes in order to waste the greatest part of
                        their income in wine at the tavern. (Pantaleoni 1922, xiv)


                     The purportedly more liberal Einaudi also demonstrated a highly clas-
                     sist attitude—with a special nod to alcohol expenditures:

                        It is well known that the wages of workers in the industrial and com-
                        mercial areas of Italy have increased noticeably . . . the evidence being the
                        conspicuous increases in unnecessary consumption of alcoholic drinks, of
                        sweets, chocolate, and biscuits. (Einaudi 1920, 96–97, italics in original)


                     Ricci joined, too: “The darlings [beniamini] of economic policy during
                     the war and after have been the workers of the great cities. In other
                     words, the savers were punished, and the squanderers rewarded” (Ricci
                     1921, 450).
                        The economist architects of Italian austerity distrusted, and perhaps
                     despised, the working classes for their ineptitude in the vital action of
                     economic growth: saving. While it is impossible to ascertain whether or
                     not pure economics was the primary source of the economists’ classist


                     220




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   220        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                             austerity, an italian story


                     convictions, it is safe to assert that pure economics at least reinforced
                     their classism.
                        Of course, one could always attempt to educate these unruly work-
                     ers. All four economists consistently preached sacrifice, abstinence,
                     frugality, and self-restraint. Einaudi was certainly the most passionate
                     on the topic, which he had taken seriously since the start of the war.
                     His op-eds in Il corriere della sera were relentless: “The Duty to Save”
                     (July 7, 1919); “The Fever to Live and the Necessity of Renunciations”
                     (April 11, 1919); and “Don’t Buy!” (June 19, 1920), which read:

                        If the newspapers preached abstinence and penitence to the nouveau
                        riche, the peasants and to the workers they would undertake an action
                        that is morally worthy and socially useful. (Einaudi 1920, 174)


                     These campaigns’ resemblance to the endeavors of Blackett and Nie-
                     meyer on the British savings committee is striking. More than in Brit-
                     ain, however, the Italian economists were convinced that after the war
                     the situation in their country had gotten completely out of hand. For
                     all their core ineptitude, workers had actually gained economic and
                     political power. It was clear that only a strong government could set
                     things straight for capital accumulation. Here entered the Mussolini
                     dictatorship.

                     Austerity, Technocracy, and Authoritarianism

                            With Bolshevism in Government . . . it is impossible to produce and save.

                            Pantaleoni (1922, iv–v)


                     Fascist and Liberal economists shared a belief in the power and good of
                     a government made up of economic experts—a technocracy. They also
                     agreed that the policies necessary to ensure sound economic principles
                     were neither political nor pursuant of any partisan interest; they were
                     simply true. It is the role and the duty of experts to define and imple-
                     ment them.
                        This technocratic ethos permeated De Stefani’s 1927 speech in front


                                                                                                        221




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   221        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     of an audience at the English Institute of Bankers: “We still judge of
                     sound finance by the strict adherence of government practice to those
                     laws that are not political but natural and human; and in all countries
                     the people are inexorably forced to pay the penalty for disobeying them”
                     (De Stefani 1927, 316, my italics).
                         Of course, after the war “disobedience” had reached unthinkable
                     highs. The four experts viewed the postwar political situation as hor-
                     rific and saw no possibility for a spontaneous or painless economic re-
                     demption. Pessimism seeped from Pantaleoni’s memorandum at the
                     Brussels conference:

                        The probability of Governments stopping their interference and taking
                        again to their proper business, which is to furnish the general conditions
                        for unfettered private activity, is very small, because public opinion sup-
                        ports them on the wrong line. . . . (Pantaleoni in Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 103;
                        reprinted in Italian in Pantaleoni 1922, 51)


                     Similarly, during a public lecture at the University of Rome, Ricci
                     opined: “moral preaching is of little benefit,” since the two major auster-
                     ity “remedies”—consuming less and producing more—were trumped
                     by their exact opposite. He continued, “all abandon themselves with a
                     shortsightedness [imprevidenza] equal to impudence [sfacciataggine] to
                     a consumption frenzy [gazzarra di consumi] . . . people adore strikes,
                     British Saturdays, the shortening of the working-day, the slowing down
                     of labour intensity” (Ricci 1920, 7–8).
                        In this heated moment, a technocratic government was necessary
                     to advance the agenda of hard austerity. It was, however, not entirely
                     sufficient. The Italian government had to be strong, too. And by strong,
                     the Italian economists did not mean a government with economic le-
                     verage; they envisioned an authoritarian, “law and order” government,
                     one that would never hesitate to use repression against the population
                     in order to protect the market economy and its natural laws (Pantaleoni
                     1922, 47–48).
                        Pantaleoni’s inclination toward violence is well documented (Mi-
                     chelini 2011a). In speeches and conversations, he frequently invoked


                     222




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   222        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     the notion of a “Fascist stick” to oppose working-class movements, and
                     he even spoke of “extermination war” [guerra di sterminio] against the
                     internal enemy: the “Bolshevik leaders.” His condoning of violence
                     to advance an anti-socialist agenda was often interspersed with anti-
                     Semitic remarks, associating Jews with the anti-capitalist conspiracy.
                     It is telling that even the liberal Ricci similarly and explicitly called for
                     repression during the tumultuous postwar years in Italy. Concerning
                     the popular uprisings against inflation, Ricci polemicized: “To repress
                     [the revolt], or better, to oppose the vandalistic fury, would have been
                     easy, at least at the beginning. Instead, public forces were left with no
                     instruction” (Ricci 1920, 11).
                         Einaudi joined Ricci in complaining about the weakness of Giolitti’s
                     and Nitti’s postwar, pre-Fascist governments. To him, Italians were “op-
                     pressed by the absolute rule of an old, ineffectual, compromising, scep-
                     tic set of politicians” (Einaudi in the Economist, November 27, 1922,
                     reprinted in Einaudi 2000, 267). To succeed against antagonistic social
                     forces, austerity measures needed an overhaul. Action had to be quick
                     and ruthless, and the inefficient democratic process could not fit this
                     purpose. But the Fascist movement seemed up to the task.
                         Einaudi’s newspaper columns reveal how the deep continuity be-
                     tween austerity and political repression was true not only for Fascist
                     economists, but also for austere Liberals. Indeed, in Il corriere della
                     sera he silently glossed over the murderous behavior of the Fascist ac-
                     tion squads, who were beating, killing, and torturing political opponents
                     throughout the country, to express profound gratitude toward Fascism
                     for “giving the decisive blow to Bolshevik tyranny and folly” (Einaudi
                     1959–65, vol. 6, 771). Einaudi’s articles attacked the attempts of the mod-
                     erate socialists to collaborate with the government to reestablish con-
                     stitutional legality and prevent the rise of Mussolini. Einaudi accused
                     them of “seeking power to control the military and the royal guard and
                     use this power against Fascism and against the nation” (Rossi 1955, 295).
                         In a similar vein, Einaudi wrote in the Economist:

                        When the worst happened, in September last, and the occupation of
                        factories by armed workers and the institution of Soviets in factories


                                                                                                     223




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   223        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                        seemed to point to an imminent Communist revolution in Italy . . .
                        [y]ouths of the middle class, returned men and officers, in indignation
                        grouped themselves into “Fasci.” . . . The communists are everywhere
                        defeated. . . . This renewed feeling of hope in the future of our country
                        is not the least important cause of the better tone in foreign exchanges.
                        (March 24, 1921, in Einaudi 2000, 191–92)


                     The four professors thought of Fascism as the new political class, as
                     “another set of politicians: young, energetic, full of vigor and of patrio-
                     tism” (Einaudi, November 27, 1922, in Einaudi 2000, 267), who would
                     finally prove determined enough to go against the will of the masses
                     and impose austerity. The questions Einaudi posed on the exact day of
                     the March on Rome (October 28, 1922) are very telling:

                        The important question is, what is the economic platform of the new
                        party? Signor Mussolini, the chief, is not an economist. Passionate and full
                        of vigor, he is able to commit his party to headlong plunges into unknown
                        seas. For the moment, he has uttered at Naples only one economic sen-
                        tence: “Italy needs at the helm a man capable of saying no to all requests
                        of new expenditure.” So far, so good . . . public opinion was seriously and
                        gravely warned of the necessity of putting an end to the increase in public
                        expenditure, and of reducing even useful expenses. . . . Will the new Party
                        have the will and the power to redress the awkward financial situation of
                        the State . . . ? (October 28, 1922, in Einaudi 2000, 263–64)


                     These questions were practically rhetorical based on Einaudi’s profound
                     optimism for the Fascist state. A few days earlier, in Il corriere della sera,
                     Einaudi had praised the economic agenda of the National Fascist Party
                     (PNF) that De Stefani presented at the party’s congress in Naples, Octo-
                     ber 22–24, 1922. Einaudi testified that De Stefani’s orthodox ideas were
                     exactly the ones he had been calling for. He concluded with a phrase
                     of full endorsement of the Fascist Party: “We ardently desire a party,
                     and be it the Fascist one if the others can’t do better, who can use the
                     appropriate means to reach the objective of the spiritual and economic
                     grandeur of our homeland [patria]” (Einaudi 1959–65, vol. 6, 921).


                     224




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   224        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                        Einaudi’s enthusiasm for this so-called Bill of Full Powers stemmed
                     from the policy’s promise to “suppress this or that public service, to
                     transfer railways and the other industrial State concerns to private
                     hands; to reduce, simplify, or increase existing taxes.” Einaudi enthused:
                     “Never was such absolute power entrusted by a Parliament to the Ex-
                     ecutive. . . . The renunciation by Parliament of all its powers for so long
                     a period was received with general cheers by the public. Italians were
                     sick of talkers and of weak executives” (“Italy—Absolute Government
                     in Italy—Taxes to Be Simplified—Working of the Succession Tax—A
                     New Excise?” Economist, December 2, 1922, 1032ff.).
                        It seems clear that the austerity economists were not infatuated with
                     Mussolini’s charismatic figure per se, but rather saw him as the right
                     man at the right time to implement the principles of pure econom-
                     ics. And indeed, the economists did not hesitate to criticize Mussolini’s
                     policies when the policies did not conform to austerity principles. For
                     example, in an article in La vita Italiana (1921), Pantaleoni condemned
                     Mussolini’s mistakes when Il Duce was found sympathizing with so-
                     cialist parties (Pantaleoni 1922, 215–16); Einaudi too was troubled
                     by some initial, seemingly Bolshevik maneuvers of the Fascist Party
                     (Einaudi 1963, vol. 6, 898). Nevertheless, the worries of the experts were
                     soon quelled: they were the experts who would surround and advise
                     Mussolini.
                        With De Stefani steering the Treasury, austerity policies imposed
                     savings and hard work upon the working classes, allowing market
                     forces to work under the best possible circumstances to reinitiate
                     capital accumulation and guarantee stable conditions for profit. Let us
                     investigate a bit further how.

                     Austerity in All Policies

                     Fiscal Austerity— The Retreat of the State

                     The objective of budget-balancing fiscal policy, at least as far as the Fas-
                     cist Party and its economists were concerned, was to reestablish the
                     best economic behaviors for the resumption of capital accumulation.


                                                                                                     225




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   225        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     The majority of citizens would have to curb their consumption to re-
                     lease resources in favor of the saving-investing classes. In one of his
                     public speeches, De Stefani left no ambiguity about what he character-
                     ized as the universal benefit of such an austerity agenda:

                        We need to speak plainly: a finance based on criteria of persecution of
                        capital is a mad finance . . . instead of impeding the amortization of
                        capital by pressing on savings that can be reinvested and that have been
                        contended from the state to private economic action, it is better to press
                        on consumption and this in the true and definitive interest of the disad-
                        vantaged populations. (De Stefani 1926b, 12)


                     As the Italian economists told the story, the true interests of the “dis-
                     advantaged population” depended on capitalism; people could only
                     prosper if capitalism prospered. But this prosperity came at a cost, and
                     the sacrifices in that enterprise were to be distributed unevenly. Fiscal
                     austerity managed the revenue and the expenditure side of the bud-
                     get, respectively, through regressive taxation and budget cuts. The two
                     worked in unison to ensure “compulsory thrift” among the people and
                     to bolster capital investment among the virtuous elite.

                     Taxes

                     De Stefani and his colleagues warred against the “confiscatory progres-
                     sivity” of the postwar period. The most renowned tax expert of the four,
                     Einaudi, stoutly opposed the “fiscal lewdness” [scelleraggini tributarie]
                     of the postwar governments and their irrational tax policies that “ban-
                     ished capital in favor of labour.”
                        The centrist-liberal prime minister Giovanni Giolitti had won the
                     1919 elections on promises of progressive taxation of “war profiteers”
                     and the wealthy, while the Socialist Party campaigned for expand-
                     ing the inheritance tax—with their spokesman, Giacomo Matteotti,
                     proposing a fiscal reform to reshape the social structure in favor of
                     the working people via a widespread redistribution of resources from
                     profits to wages (Matteotti 1919). Even the Fascist Manifesto of 1919


                     226




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   226        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     reflected the spirit of the times, as it announced “[a] strong progressive
                     tax on capital that will truly expropriate a portion of all wealth.” These
                     were dangerous times, as Einaudi put it, when no progressive taxation
                     could satisfy the “cupidity” of the masses (Einaudi 1927).
                        However, in his speech in May 1923 at the Scala Theatre in Milan,
                     De Stefani announced a turning point: “The politics of persecution of
                     capital has been suddenly arrested thanks to our action” (De Stefani
                     1923, 226). Tellingly, his speech was delivered not in front of the people’s
                     representatives in Parliament, but rather in front of the elite of Italy’s
                     financial capital, who sat comfortably in the cushioned seats of the
                     majestic theater. The minister took the occasion to emphasize that the
                     state should release private capital from fiscal pressure to promote its
                     “natural” use in private investment (De Stefani 1923, 210), to stimulate
                     ever greater savings, and attract foreign capital. Indeed, the Fascist
                     state exempted international financial capital from taxation. (As chap-
                     ter 8 will detail, these measures gained the regime great popularity in
                     international financial circles and secured profuse credit.)
                        The new taxation principle was labeled produttivista [productivis-
                     tic]. It prioritized the accumulation of wealth over any “aim of social
                     justice or more egalitarian redistribution of wealth” (Einaudi 1927, 490).
                     The redistributive rationale was inherently classist (and akin to the sys-
                     tem in Britain): when the state taxed, it collected resources from the
                     whole community, then used that revenue to pay back the possessors
                     of state bonds, i.e., the creditor classes of society (De Stefani 1928, 195).
                        De Stefani’s 1923 fiscal reforms expanded the tax base to impose
                     greater tax control over the lower classes. These tax brackets were sub-
                     ject to the imposta di ricchezza mobile (the tax on income) for the first
                     time. De Stefani was triumphant: “I found an army of 600,000 con-
                     tributors for the imposta di ricchezza mobile . . . a new fiscal conscrip-
                     tion of wage earners has come to close with 100 thousand enrolled . . .
                     the nation has understood the necessity of the state” (De Stefani
                     1923, 206).
                        Far from a conscription of riches, De Stefani had actually managed
                     to constrict wages. Moreover, to further (and silently) extract resources
                     from the poorer members of society, the Fascist government steadily


                                                                                                     227




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   227        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     increased consumption taxes throughout the decade. The ratio between
                     direct and indirect tax revenue dropped from 0.94 in 1922 to 0.72 in
                     1925, and to 0.61 by 1929—an even more pronounced trend than in the
                     British case. More specifically, duties on basic commodities grew be-
                     tween 1922 and 1925 by approximately 5 percent per year in real terms
                     (Toniolo 1980, 48). Meanwhile the government managed to abolish
                     “vexatious taxation on luxury goods” (Einaudi 1927, 490).
                        In line with the principles of austerity, Italy’s medium-high income
                     brackets benefited from tax relief through the abolition of all progres-
                     sive war and postwar taxation. This included, for example, the long-
                     contested taxes on war profits and the mandatory declaration of own-
                     ership of financial assets [nominatività obbligatoria dei titoli azionari]
                     (Rossi 1955, 75–90). The abolition of the nominatività dei titoli effec-
                     tively curtailed any possibility to progressively tax capital income.
                     Moreover, the technical findings of Pantaleoni’s earlier study on inheri-
                     tance taxes buttressed De Stefani’s July 1923 orders, effectively eliminat-
                     ing taxation of inherited wealth altogether.
                        De Stefani’s reforms also provided structural facilitation of tax eva-
                     sion at the top (see Gabbuti 2020a, 28–29). Out of an estimated 18 bil-
                     lion lire of total tax evasion in Italy by 1934, no less than 8 billion were
                     dividends and interests on public bonds—financial channels pursued
                     almost exclusively by the nation’s wealthy. The minister himself had to
                     admit that “between 50 and 75” of the income tax was evaded, with
                     “greater evasion at the top” (De Stefani 1926b, 211). This loss for the state
                     coffers was, however, irrelevant with respect to what really counted: the
                     reestablishment of capital order.

                     Social Policy

                     Along with taxation, a reduction in public expenditure was key to shift-
                     ing resources from public consumption to private capital investment.
                        At the peak of his administrative powers, in December 1922 De Ste-
                     fani appointed his own “commission for the revision of balances and
                     the reduction of public expenditures,” taking cues from the successes
                     of Britain’s Geddes Committee. Through this commission, De Stefani


                     228




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   228        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     worked unremittingly to revise and slash all items in the state budget.
                     Pantaleoni chaired the commission, and Ricci was one of its leading
                     figures. The latter expressed fond memories of it: “Minister De Stefani
                     has imposed on himself as a supreme duty [supremo dovere] the reduc-
                     tion of expenditures; it is for him such an ardent preoccupation to be
                     blamed as an obsession. He put together a small committee in which
                     he himself intervened daily, and the committee, working day and night
                     for three months, has reviewed the budget entry by entry and proposed
                     economies that were agreed-upon by the individual ministries” (Ricci
                     1923, 612).
                        The results of this “new will” [volontà nuova] performed “miracles
                     to curb expenditures” (Ricci 1923, 612). De Stefani was fond of using
                     the euphemism “the spirit of the Minister of Finance hovers [aleg-
                     gia] in all administrations” (De Stefani 1923, 212). Pensions and sub-
                     sidies for war veterans and their families were the first to go. From
                     1923 to 1924 total state expenditures were cut by a third (Ragioneria
                     Generale dello Stato [RGS] 2011), with redistributive expenditures
                     suffering the most.
                        In the Economist, Einaudi cheered the reforms achieved by the com-
                     mittee, adding that their self-evident merits “call[ed] for no comment”
                     (May 1923, in Einaudi 2000, 289). The efforts to “increase the powers
                     of the Italian Treasury,” he wrote, took direct inspiration from Britain:
                     “Signor De Stefani laid great stress on the efficacy of the British Trea-
                     sury in checking expenses and controlling expenditure departments”
                     (ibid., 290–91).
                        The experts’ counter-reforms reversed the three major reformist
                     postwar victories detailed in chapter 2—insurance against disabilities
                     and old age, insurance that covered accidents in the agriculture sector,
                     and mandatory unemployment insurance.
                        A final, devastating volley against the wartime economy came with
                     the abolition of the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance in April
                     1923—a blow to all Italian workers who had just recently won their
                     twenty-year battle for the Ministry’s creation.
                        By June 30, 1925, the budget was balanced: the amount of public ex-
                     penditure (excluding defense and debt payments) as a percentage of


                                                                                                     229




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   229        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     nominal GDP reached the level of the prewar years (13 percent in 1912),
                     a considerable drop from the almost 29 percent of 1922. The grip of
                     fiscal austerity did not loosen from there. Social expenditure in par-
                     ticular continued to fall throughout the decade and beyond, reaching
                     its lowest point in 1934 (by which time the amount spent on social in-
                     tervention had dropped by more than a quarter compared to 1924).
                     In the meantime, the amount the state spent on debt and interest pay-
                     ments was more than double the amount spent on social programs, and
                     continued to rise through the whole of the 1920s and most of the 1930s
                     (RGS 2011). If we were to think of the austere Fascist state as a discipli-
                     narian father, then it had a clear bias: while it was thrifty toward the
                     majority, it was willing to be quite generous when it came to the habits
                     of its entrepreneurial children.
                         For evidence of the fiscal priorities of the austere Italian state, the
                     famous bailout of two major industrial-financial consortia—Ansaldo/
                     Bank of Rome and the Ilva/Credito Italiano—is telling. In the canonical
                     understanding of Fascism, there would seem to be a conflict between
                     these interventionist measures and De Stefani’s laissez-faire Fascist
                     policies (see for example Toniolo 1980). But through a lens of austerity,
                     one can observe and appreciate the common ground between budget
                     cuts and bailouts: both actively reinforced capital accumulation. In this
                     sense, it is clear that austerity is much more than simple laissez-faire; it
                     is a lever of power for a society’s upper crust. It is telling, then, that this
                     seemingly discordant set of policies remains the go-to policy interven-
                     tion for governments dealing with financial crises today.
                         Ultimately, the curtailing of social expenditures was undertaken
                     with a more insidious objective than merely curbing the deficit. It was
                     about sound relations of production, and specifically about disciplining
                     the workers. Here Ricci left no doubts when he attacked social reforms
                     for “protecting hustlers [faccendieri] and troublemakers [facinorosi]”
                     (Ricci 1926, 15). He was especially critical of unemployment benefits
                     that quelled the market’s force over labor: “When there is a government
                     that gives out subsidies to the unemployed, the temptation is born to
                     become unemployed [nasce la tentazione di disoccuparsi], to take the
                     subsidy, to work less, and produce less” (Ricci 1926, 22). Cuts in state


                     230




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   230        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     expenditure worked hand in hand with industrial austerity to free en-
                     trepreneurs from the hindrance of workers’ political demands.

                     Industrial Austerity

                     Privatization

                     Ricci spoke for his colleagues when he repeatedly called the state “a
                     terrible [pessimo] producer and a terrible administrator” (Ricci
                     1921, 229).
                        The scorn for the state’s economic ineptitude was grounded in a deep
                     anxiety: the melding of the economy and politics did not allow for the
                     class-appropriate behavior of the economic agents. The financial flour-
                     ishing of lower classes amid government interventions did little to help
                     the private sector. In this way, the saving-investing classes were being
                     “chased away” [scacciati] (Ricci 1920, 8). This crowding-out argument,
                     taken from the British Treasury, was a common narrative among the
                     Italian experts. In this economic understanding, wealth is effectively
                     zero-sum; as De Stefani wrote on the pages of Il corriere della sera, “the
                     public body is a competitor of the private entrepreneur in the use of
                     currency and of national wealth. The miracle of the multiplication of
                     bread and fish has been done only once” (De Stefani 1928, 24).
                        On the other hand, a socialist economy was portrayed as giving the
                     working classes a “free ride” to work less and consume more. For Italian
                     economists it was understood that, once hired by the state, employees
                     degenerated in their behavior, becoming the antithesis of the virtuous
                     homo economicus. Public employees became immoral “loafers” [fan-
                     nulloni] because they lost the sound economic incentive of the unfet-
                     tered market (Ricci 1926, 13). “The employee is brought to consider
                     the fixed stipend as an acquired right, a guaranteed pension [pensione
                     di garanzia] in exchange for which there is no obligation to give any-
                     thing,” Einaudi argued. He scolded, “the duty to work arises when over-
                     time begins, since it’s uncertain and is paid according to the work done”
                     (Einaudi 1959–65, vol. 5, 233). Such critical observations are common
                     within the economics literature today. The celebrated Italian economist


                                                                                                      231




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   231        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Alberto Alesina, who studied economics as an undergraduate at Boc-
                     coni before a career at Harvard, bemoaned public-sector jobs as creat-
                     ing a “culture of dependency” whereby “residents in the South [of Italy]
                     demand more public employment in order to take advantage of a large
                     income premium and a greater job security” (Danninger, Alesina, and
                     Rostagno 1999, 3–4). To Alesina and others before him, public employ-
                     ment was synonymous with individuals who were unprepared to “face
                     the market” (ibid.). In other words, citizens were unwilling to accept
                     high enough exploitation.
                        Alesina’s thoughts resonated with Pantaleoni’s earlier statements,
                     with the latter arguing that without progressive government interven-
                     tions “the entire population, and especially the low-income classes
                     would have on the one hand suppressed luxury expenses and on the
                     other offered more labour” (Pantaleoni 1922, 47–48). Under Fascism,
                     technocrats had the tools to “redeem” the Italian population.
                        The financial year 1922–1923 marked a major turning point for public
                     works expenditures. Just one year prior, public works were at their his-
                     toric peak. De Stefani’s administration began a drastic retrenchment, to
                     the point that in 1924–1925 and 1925–1926 expenditures reached figures
                     that were lower than the prewar fiscal years (Cecini 2011, 333). More
                     Italian people would depend on the impersonal laws of the market for
                     their livelihoods. In this way, industrial austerity collaborated with fis-
                     cal austerity (especially in the form of cuts in welfare measures) to in-
                     tensify people’s market dependence, and thus quiet people’s dissenting
                     political voices.
                        A 1923 reform of bureaucracy (Royal Decree 2395, November 11,
                     1923, in GU 270 Supplement [November 17, 1923]) pursued efficiency
                     through layoffs: the regime fired more than 65,000 Italians (De Felice
                     1966, vol. 1, 397). Workers of the publicly owned postal and railway
                     sectors were most targeted. De Stefani made clear that their high defi-
                     cits depended primarily on “an exaggerated expense for personnel,” a
                     workforce he characterized as “too numerous and well remunerated”
                     (De Stefani 1923, 215).
                        Between 1923 and 1924, the Fascist state removed 27,000 railway
                     workers (15 percent of the total employees) and made arrangements


                     232




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   232        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     to dismiss a further 13,000 and to curtail sick leave. The British am-
                     bassador to Italy, Sir Ronald William Graham, described the events as
                     “the introduction of iron discipline and the strictest application of the
                     eight-hour day.” In the meantime, in the name of greater revenue, a
                     regressive rise in ticket fares forced workers to choose between giving
                     up the service or paying the higher fares and thus “consuming less” in
                     their other daily expenditures.
                         Large-scale privatizations were the permanent solution to impose
                     the other half of the austerity motto, “produce more.” Stripped of the
                     state’s wartime monopolies, workers would be disciplined into compet-
                     ing within the free labor market—a competition so fierce that strikes
                     would become “impossible,” Pantaleoni exaggerated. While the rail-
                     ways proved too tough to privatize, the Italian experts found success
                     in other important sectors, to the extent that scholars speak today of
                     these events as “the earliest case of large-scale privatisation in a capital-
                     ist economy” (Bel 2011, 939).
                         These privatizations were everywhere. The state had served as the
                     main provider of telephone services since 1907, having nationalized
                     services previously owned by private firms. In February 1923, a Royal
                     Decree established the conditions to grant franchises to private pro-
                     viders, and by 1925 the government had fully privatized the telephone
                     sector. The Istituto Nazionale delle Assicurazioni (Institute of National
                     Insurances) had been established in 1912 to provide life insurance, pre-
                     viously controlled by foreign firms, to the Italian public. In April 1923,
                     the state relinquished its monopoly, and a de facto duopoly with private
                     companies (Assicurazioni Generali and Adriatica di Sicurta) began.
                     Also in 1923, the state gave up the control of match sales, which it had
                     assumed in 1916. Private firms also took over the building and manage-
                     ment of motorways (see Bortolotti 1992, De Luca 1992).

                     Wages, Strikes, Corporativism

                     Austerity’s effort to reconstitute the divide between the economic
                     and political domains guaranteed that “the direction of the labour of
                     the masses” would rest once again “in the hands of the men of talent


                                                                                                     233




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   233        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     and personality whom selection makes into entrepreneurs” (Pantaleoni
                     1922, 47–48). Pure economics had dispelled the possibility of class an-
                     tagonism within industry. The vertical relation between capital and
                     labor was portrayed as harmonious and to the benefit of the workers
                     themselves. In fact, workers’ livelihood and productivity depended
                     on the capacity of a select few—those who most resembled the homo
                     economicus—and their capacity to save/invest.
                         In this model, workers lost economic agency, bringing their work
                     in line with the definition of labor in Pantaleoni’s Pure Principles as a
                     “complementary commodity.” This concept of labor stresses the pri-
                     ority of capital over labor, a priority also reflected in the wage-fund
                     theory—again, an important building block of pure economics. This
                     theory presupposes that wages are always and necessarily paid out
                     of the entrepreneur’s capital—not as a portion of the surplus he has
                     reaped from workers’ labor, but rather as something that is made pos-
                     sible only because of the entrepreneur’s virtuous savings. The entrepre-
                     neur anticipates wages with his disposable capital and plays the vital
                     task of disciplining/directing labor, insofar as the latter lacks the capac-
                     ity to self-manage: “The entrepreneur disciplines labour and discipline
                     means coordination . . . this coordination is a difficult problem that few
                     know how to resolve, and the one who knows how to resolve it is called
                     entrepreneur . . . the entrepreneur does not tell the worker to work but
                     to work in a certain way: you know how to organize without him? Go
                     ahead [fate pure]” (Pantaleoni 1910, 230).
                         No economic theory could be more distant from the thoughts
                     and practices of the Ordinovista movement detailed in chapter 4. For
                     Gramsci and Togliatti, workers’ political agency emerged from the cen-
                     trality (and potential autonomy) of their labor. Instead, in the world of
                     these four economics professors, workers’ loss of economic agency en-
                     sured their loss of political agency: understood as any other commod-
                     ity, economists saw labor as a thing to be exclusively priced through the
                     laws of supply and demand.
                         In his academic lectures, Pantaleoni asked students: “what wage can
                     the entrepreneur give to the worker?” He answered: “as much as he is
                     worth. He certainly cannot pay him more than what he is worth, and by


                     234




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   234        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     competition, he will not be able to pay him less . . . the rule that labour
                     is paid how much it is worth [tanto quanto vale], nothing more nothing
                     less, holds” (Pantaleoni 1910, 204).
                         Clearly, the concept of exploitation as a social class relationship (i.e.,
                     the idea that surplus value is actually reaped from unpaid labor time) is
                     eliminated from such a framework. The focus lies exclusively on “equal”
                     market transactions and on the fair remuneration of labor according to
                     the rule that, under market competition, the price of labor is equal to its
                     marginal productivity. For Pantaleoni and his colleagues, this rule had
                     been dramatically broken in the postwar momentum and legal pro-
                     tection of labor. Unlike economic laws, political laws had no inherent
                     limits and could be pushed to a frightening extreme: unemployment
                     benefits, minimum wage, and hour regulations brought wages “much
                     above their marginal efficiency” (Pantaleoni, Memorandum, Brussels
                     1920, vol. 5, 106).
                         The Fascist state passed coercive labor laws that reduced wages and
                     forbade unions, coming to the defense of true economic laws. The para-
                     dox here is stark: economists, so adamant in protecting the free market
                     against the state, had little problem with the state intervening in the
                     labor market. This reflects another core assumption underlying auster-
                     ity: in a moment of crisis, the “pure economics” of capitalism cannot be
                     resurrected on its own.
                         Starting at the end of the factory occupations in the fall of 1920, Fas-
                     cist violence against workers’ organizations became a constant. How-
                     ever, workers remained resilient even after Mussolini’s rise to power.
                     For example, during the 1924 elections in Turin for the renewal of the
                     industrial committees, workers voted predominantly for the CGdL, a
                     party antagonistic to Fascism. The Fascist unions, meanwhile, which
                     preached the defense of production in the national interest, received
                     only a few votes.
                         The austere Fascist state overcame these difficulties through legal
                     means. In October 1925, the Pact of Palazzo Vidoni suppressed workers’
                     internal factory committees altogether and placed all organized labor
                     under the exclusive control of the Confederation of Fascist Corpora-
                     tions, which espoused—and enforced—industrial peace in Italy.


                                                                                                     235




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   235        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                         Royal Decree 563 of April 3, 1926 (in GU 87 [April 14, 1926]) formal-
                     ized the pact and refused to legally recognize independent unions. The
                     remaining Fascist unions became nothing more than an extension of
                     the Fascist Party and the Fascist state. The regime declared strikes and
                     lockouts illegal while reenacting the compulsory arbitration that had
                     militarized the workforce during the Great War. The right to strike was
                     replaced by a power to appeal through a Fascist union to a labor magis-
                     tracy with the idea that “impartial justice of the State replaces the ruin-
                     ous struggle between opposing parties” (Functions of the New Labour
                     Magistracy in Italy, March 25, 1927, FO 371/12202, f. 91).
                         The abolition of unions fit the agenda of the liberal economist Ricci,
                     who repeatedly spoke publicly against the unionist logic, portraying
                     them as a threat to both state sovereignty and capitalist production:
                     “The union is a monopolistic organization. The monopolist aims at
                     maximizing its gain and it obtains it with a contraction of the quan-
                     tity sold, and in the last instance of the quantity produced” (Ricci
                     1926, 22–23).
                         The final defeat of workers’ aspirations came with the Labour Char-
                     ter of 1927, which suppressed any chance for class conflict. The char-
                     ter codified the spirit of corporativism, the object of which, in Mus-
                     solini’s words, was “to unite within the sovereign state the pernicious
                     dualism of the forces of capital and labour” that were no longer “re-
                     garded as necessarily opposed to one another but as elements which
                     should and can aim for a common goal, the higher interest of pro-
                     duction” (“The Circular to all Syndical Associations,” March 25, 1927,
                     FO 371/12202, f. 91).
                         This birth of the new Italian corporations sanctioned a legal associa-
                     tion between employers and employees representing the “unitary orga-
                     nizations of production” to “maintain the discipline of production and
                     work, and promote its perfection.” These syndicates, as Einaudi wrote
                     in the Economist, “are obliged to exercise a selective influence amongst
                     workmen, so that their technical capacity and moral standard can be
                     indefinitely increased” (“Italy’s Labour Charter,” Economist, May 14,
                     1927, 1008ff.). De Stefani hailed the charter as an “institutional revolu-
                     tion,” [rivoluzione istituzionale] while Einaudi justified its “corporativ-


                     236




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   236        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     ist” wage-setting as the only means to mimic the optimal results of the
                     neoclassical competitive market (Einaudi 1931, 316).
                         Once labor became a social obligation, workers were subdued into
                     fulfilling “the development of national strength.” This rhetoric, which
                     became common among the technocrats, was the most powerful means
                     to mask increasing exploitation. Emblematic of this trend of greater ex-
                     traction of surplus value was the widespread deployment of the so-called
                     “system Bedaux,” an American post-Taylorist method of work measure-
                     ment and scientific management that Fiat first introduced in Italy in 1927.
                     (The Bedaux system also found solid footing in Britain in those years.)
                     Even the Fascist unions were compelled to denounce these intensified la-
                     bor efforts, which quickly resulted in fatigue and ill health among work-
                     ers. The unions went so far as to raise concerns about the “integrity of
                     future generations” [l’integrità della stirpe] (Musso 2002, 167).
                         The continuity and coherence between austerity and Fascist corpo-
                     rativism is visible not only in the process of labor coercion, but also
                     in the explicit priority of the principle of capitalist production over any
                     other political principle, and the explicit safeguard of the principle of
                     private ownership of the means of production. Article 7 of the charter
                     read: “The corporative State considers private initiative, in the field of
                     production, as the most efficient and useful instrument of the Nation,”
                     which meant that “state intervention in economic production may take
                     place only where private initiative is lacking or is insufficient.”
                         Thus, austere corporativism conceived the “interest of the nation at
                     large” (“Italy’s Labour Charter,” Economist, May 14, 1927, 1008ff.) as hav-
                     ing the interests of the owner-investor class at its core; it also regarded
                     the subordination of the majority to capital order as a part of the na-
                     tional interest.
                         Through these authoritarian measures, the Fascist regime was
                     able to achieve a key objective of austerity: an unparalleled slashing
                     of wages. By 1929 there had been a 26 percent drop in nominal daily
                     wages compared to 1926 (Scholliers and Zamagni 1995, Table A.6).
                     Thus, throughout the 1920s industrial growth and increasing labor pro-
                     ductivity went hand in hand with a severe decline in real wages (see
                     chapter 9, figure 9.7).


                                                                                                     237




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   237        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                        Indeed, unlike the British case, industrial austerity under a dictator-
                     ship did not need to rely on an economic downturn to suppress wages:
                     real wages had dropped significantly between 1923 and 1925, even while
                     the country was experiencing economic growth. As we shall see in the
                     next section, politically induced wage suppression became ever more
                     central once monetary austerity and its goal of achieving the gold stan-
                     dard kicked in.

                     Monetary Austerity

                            If the national government defends the lira, it is doing so in the interest of
                            the savers.

                            Volpi, speech in Parliament on December 9, 1926 (in Cotula and Spaventa
                            1993, 579)




                     The Italian professors had not been introduced to the complexities of
                     Hawtreyan monetary theory—especially Hawtrey’s belief that infla-
                     tion was an inherent threat stemming from the very functioning of the
                     market economy. The four Italians’ understanding of inflation was the
                     most orthodox kind, rooted in a basic idea that price disequilibrium—
                     like any form of economic disequilibrium—was due to external, and
                     especially political, interferences. Thus, in the Italian case of inflation
                     following World War I, it was simply the result of the government’s
                     increase of currency circulation, which was necessary to fund the
                     war effort.
                        As inflation worsened, the Italian government sought to abate it
                     through price caps. This did nothing but worsen the situation: as Panta-
                     leoni bemoaned, “[t]he artificially low price of commodities merely in-
                     creases its consumption,” further increasing the scarcity of goods. In-
                     stead, Pantaleoni wrote in his Brussels memorandum, if the state were
                     to halt new currency expansion, “an equilibrium of nominal prices
                     would be settled by itself. . . . Private commerce can in no possible way
                     trouble equilibrium prices” (Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 104).
                        For this self-equilibrating approach to work required an introduc-
                     tion of austerity policies, the same sort enacted by the British Treasury.


                     238




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   238        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     In other words, the Italian government needed to decrease liquidity in
                     its economy, and to do that it had to decrease borrowing —measures
                     that would moderate spending among the general population while
                     boosting resources for creditors. In doing so, savers/investors could
                     gain confidence instead of worrying that monetary uncertainty—
                     inflation—would “mow down their income” [falcidierà il loro reddito],
                     as Ricci put it (Ricci 1919, 33).
                         In their manipulations of the economy, Italy’s stewarding econo-
                     mists were willing to tolerate domestic sluggishness if it meant taming
                     inflation. They likewise took solace in a belief that the lower domes-
                     tic prices they were engineering would increase foreign demand for
                     Italian goods. They were wrong, but not egregiously so: the lira had
                     proven remarkably stable during the early years of the Fascist govern-
                     ment, offering a reasonable basis for the economists to bank on what
                     today’s economists call export-led growth. Like their British colleagues
                     in chapter 6, the Italian economists were betting on external demand
                     for cheap Italian goods.
                         However, for a secondary power like Italy, engagement in interna-
                     tional markets was often not enough. During the spring of 1925, the
                     lira’s fate turned around dramatically, a fall that The Times attributed
                     to “a bad attack of speculation fever” (“Italian Finance,” The Times,
                     April 9, 1925, 9), since “the economic situation of Italy . . . does not
                     justify the recent decline in the value of the Lira” (ibid.). The episode
                     demonstrated how, even if a country’s fundamentals were sound, in-
                     ternational pressure on an unpegged currency could be devastating. In
                     response, Mussolini became hell-bent on achieving the gold parity and
                     combatting Italy’s worsening exchange rate. His famous Pesaro speech
                     of August 1926 publicly inaugurated the so-called Battle of the Lira.
                     Mussolini ordered “combined effort and sacrifices made by all classes
                     in the highest spirit of discipline and responsibility” (August 18, 1926,
                     OV 36/22, f. 123A, 8) in order to defend the Lira (ibid., 10). Here again,
                     the working classes would pick up the tab.
                         Einaudi, Ricci, and De Stefani (who resigned from his post in July
                     1925 and was succeeded by the financial expert Giuseppe Volpi, Count
                     di Misurata) were loyal soldiers in Mussolini’s lira battle. And like the


                                                                                                     239




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   239        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Duce, they presented it as a matter of shared class burden and “national”
                     interest, especially in its virtuous objectives. As a practical matter, the
                     popular classes shouldered the national burden. The government’s ob-
                     jective was to cement what much of the public had fought against just
                     a few years back: the bourgeois economic order and its values. Einaudi,
                     speaking plainly in the Economist, wrote that “some suffering is the
                     inevitable accompaniment of the revaluation of the lira,” yet it would
                     guarantee “the elimination of the unfit” and of course, “prudence and
                     restraint,” and the “best roads towards recovery and future prosperity.”
                         As in the case of Britain, dear money meant a decrease in note cir-
                     culation (a 21.4 percent drop between 1925 and 1929), and especially a
                     rise in the bank rate. As his last hurrah as finance minister, in June 1925
                     De Stefani increased the interest rate from 3 to 6.5 percent, then further
                     to 7 percent, to chase “the recent increase in Bank rate in England and
                     the United States.”
                         By December 1927, Mussolini could proudly announce victory: the
                     lira was pegged to the exchange rate against the British pound at Quota
                     Novanta (92.46 lire to the pound sterling and 19 lire to the dollar). Such
                     a revaluation of the lira (an increase in value of 39 percent with respect
                     to its value in August 1926) required extraordinary efforts to adjust
                     prices and wages. The Duce gave a meticulous summary of what got
                     them there:

                        9) A rigid discipline and hard work by the Italian people; b) The balanc-
                        ing and surplus of the budget; c) The unification of the right to issue
                        bank-notes; d) A considerably reduced currency; e) Settlement of for-
                        eign war debts and consolidation of the floating debt; f) Favourable bal-
                        ance of international payments; g) The actual stability of the exchange
                        for eight months; h) The adjustment of salaries, cost of production and
                        prices; i) A large gold cover in the circulation on the basis of the new
                        gold parity. (December 21, 1927, FO 371/12198, f. 234, 2)


                     Mussolini’s list of thank-yous laid bare a symbiosis of monetary, fiscal,
                     and industrial austerity that were the core of Fascist economic policy;




                     240




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   240        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     his comments also acknowledged the selective sacrifice that the trinity
                     enforced.
                        For all the pomp of Mussolini’s announcement, ongoing revaluation
                     of the lira—which had the potential to reduce exports due to the ensu-
                     ing price changes—made it imperative that Italy bolster its fiscal aus-
                     terity. In short, export shortfalls demanded compensation through a
                     decrease in domestic consumption.
                        In this spirit, De Stefani especially advocated for the reduction of the
                     subsidies for public employees as a “provision of vital economic impor-
                     tance” for the country’s revaluation policies (De Stefani 1928, 99). In
                     the same spirit, Count Volpi declared his “determination . . . to secure
                     economies in all possible directions,” even in a moment of budgetary
                     surplus. Economizing took the evocative form of the mandatory sale
                     of coarser bread, called “grey bread.” The British embassy reported, “the
                     press exhorts all Italians to take pride in using this war bread as a con-
                     tribution towards victory in the present economic struggle” (August 6,
                     1926, FO 371/11387, fol. 154).
                        To compensate for a lack of competitiveness owing to the country’s
                     appreciated currency, lower consumption went hand in hand with
                     higher production at lower costs. A stronger lira required lower nomi-
                     nal wages, which could secure lower prices on the international mar-
                     ket and thus reestablish the country’s competitiveness abroad, which in
                     turn had the potential to improve the national balance of payments.
                     In this sense, revaluation of the lira ushered in an unprecedented de-
                     gree of industrial austerity.
                        Once the Labour Charter eradicated all labor opposition, the Fascist
                     state could take daring steps to reduce wages by legal decree. In May
                     1927, all public employees, including those in the railways and other au-
                     tonomous administrations, lost the bonus they were due to compensate
                     for the high cost of living (without the cost of living having decreased).
                     That same month there were wage cuts of around 10 percent for agri-
                     cultural and industrial labor. In October another generalized reduction
                     of nominal wages, in the magnitude of 10–20 percent, ensued (Toniolo
                     1980, 114). As Volpi had put it to the Italian Senate in February 1928,



                                                                                                      241




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   241        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     by this time the country was “unified under iron discipline,” having
                     made “admirable efforts” to “facilitate the adjustments of wholesale and
                     retail prices to the value of the lira” (February 17, 1928, FO 371/12947,
                     fol. 163, 20).
                        Industrialists accepted monetary revaluation on the grounds that
                     drastic cuts in labor costs fully compensated for the fall in the prices
                     of manufacturing outputs. The short-term losses of profits due to
                     deflation—which raised the cost of production by increasing the price
                     of borrowing and hampered competitiveness—represented a minimal
                     toll. It opened an expressway to stable, structural exploitation (see fig-
                     ure 9.2). Indeed, as was illustrated in Britain, increased unemployment
                     subordinated the workforce into accepting hierarchical relations of
                     production—the vital prerequisite for profit-making.
                        Official statistics denied increases in unemployment, but sources
                     suggesting otherwise leaked abroad. In October 1926, the British em-
                     bassy reported on layoffs at Fiat: “there are serious rumours of thou-
                     sands of workmen having been dismissed and production cut down”
                     (October 29, 1926, OV 36/1, f. 18, 2). By the end of 1928, high unem-
                     ployment and low labor guaranteed a swift economic recovery and a
                     rise in profits. Capital’s reward was visible in the profit rate data (fig-
                     ure 9.3): Between 1927 and 1930, the overall profit rate jumped from
                     8.68 percent to 16.6 percent.
                        Clearly the process of “rehabilitation” of the lira was not merely a
                     monetary operation, but something even more foundational for post-
                     war capitalism: the sealing of a class system into stable hierarchies un-
                     der the name of necessary national efforts for economic redemption.
                     During an interview with the Daily Mail on July 1, 1926, Mussolini dis-
                     cussed the new legal authorization that kicked to the curb the 8-hour
                     workday law—one of labor’s most significant postwar reformist victo-
                     ries. Ambassador Graham reported:

                        Sig. Mussolini is stated to have said that the new restrictions [of a 9-hour
                        working day] will be received, not only without opposition, but with
                        enthusiasm, that if he had invited the Italians to work 10 hours instead
                        of nine, he knew they would have agreed, because they are conscious


                     242




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   242        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                        of the fact that the innovation is not a caprice of the Government but
                        is dictated by national necessity. (July 2, 1926, FO 371/11387, fol. 104, 5)


                     In sum, the gold standard in Italy, as in Britain, did not merely rep-
                     resent the endpoint of much-suffered austerity. It was rather a device
                     to enforce its “naturalization,” since under the gold standard austerity
                     constraints were no longer politically disputable. The legacy of “golden”
                     austerity was not short-lived. To avoid losing the gold parity after the
                     1929 downturn, the country was confronted with more restrictive fiscal
                     and credit policy combined with a decree that cut wages by another
                     8–12 percent in December 1930 (Cotula and Spaventa 1993, 889). In-
                     deed, austere theories continued to dominate the understanding of the
                     possible causes and solutions to the Great Crash of 1929, both among
                     Liberals and among Fascist economists in Italy. If the primary cause of
                     the crisis was diffused “moral decay” and “overconsumption,” the solu-
                     tion was to be more wage deflation—in other words, the usual motto:
                     consume less, produce more.

                     Conclusion

                     This chapter has set out to explore the birth of austerity in Italy under
                     the “impartial” guide of four renowned professors of economics. De-
                     spite their ideological divergence, the four shared a deeper set of beliefs
                     and a precise mission: they worked in concert as guardians of a univer-
                     sal economic science—a science that, despite its purported purity, had
                     the intrinsic practical aim of “taming” citizens to consume less and pro-
                     duce more. The emerging Fascist regime endowed the professors with
                     the opportunity of a lifetime: to actually mold society to correspond to
                     the ideal of their models.
                        In a moment when war collectivism challenged the efficiency of
                     market performance, these professors were steadfast regarding its ide-
                     alization and protection; in a moment of heightened class struggle, the
                     four set out to deny class antagonism through their “classless” mod-
                     els. Indeed, pure economics operated to depoliticize economic theory
                     by expelling class analysis, only to reintroduce classist assumptions


                                                                                                       243




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   243        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     covertly in their rigorous microeconomic calculations. In this manner,
                     any class difference was the outcome of a difference in the extent of
                     individual rational economic behaviors.
                         One need only step away from the abstractions of their academic
                     works to attain a full view of their classist beliefs. Pantaleoni was the
                     most explicit: “Bourgeois is whoever has the moral and intellectual
                     value required to be such: he who lacks talent, activity, perseverance,
                     control of his own passions and impulses, stops being a Bourgeois;
                     these qualities are all required to emerge amongst comrades and dwell
                     in a class that is not that of the plebes [volgo]” (Pantaleoni 1922, 109).
                         Under a strong government, austerity policies—fiscal, monetary,
                     and industrial—served just such a purpose of protecting the wealthy
                     capitalist minority in its capacity to save, invest, and ultimately profit
                     while forcing the majority to consume less and work more.
                         In sum, as in the British case, the experts’ move toward an apolitical
                     theory had the political aim of subordinating the majority of citizens to
                     the logic of capital accumulation. Going back to De Stefani’s La Scala
                     speech, we may now grasp the full meaning of his use of the word “aus-
                     terity.” He employed it to encourage individual sacrifice and, in particu-
                     lar, the giving up of social protections in the name of the nation’s more
                     important financial needs:

                        In the speech of the 25th of November, I reminded the Parliament that,
                        right after the march on Rome, the awareness of the financial necessities
                        of the Nation were widespread, even in the humblest part of the Italian
                        population. Today, as yesterday, I need to place on the national agenda
                        the conscious renunciation of the rights gained by the crippled, the in-
                        valids, the soldiers. These renunciations constitute for our soul a sacred
                        sacrifice: austerity. (De Stefani 1926b, 34, my emphasis)


                     These may remind us of the words of the British Treasury officials who,
                     though more soft-spoken when addressing the working classes, also
                     invoked the notions of “sacrifice” and “enforcing abstinence” (Hawtrey
                     1919a, 230). Indeed, the Italian story more explicitly discloses dynam-
                     ics and goals that were already apparent in chapter 6 regarding Brit-


                     244




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   244        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                         austerity, an italian story


                     ish austerity. Economic theory—be it Hawtreyan economics or pure
                     economics—provided consensus for coercive policies, disguising them
                     as beneficial to society at large. We have shown how our experts con-
                     cealed the relations of domination behind abstract economic principles
                     only to buttress these relations of domination via austerity policies.
                        Chapter 8 delves deeper into the interconnection between the two
                     stories: Fascist austerity was widely applauded and supported by the
                     British establishment.




                                                                                                     245




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   245        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 8

                     Italian Austerity and Fascism
                     through British Eyes




                            When Italy has well considered these fundamental truths, when she has
                            convinced herself that her only hope is in herself, that others will not grant
                            her credits unless she shows herself to deserve them by her austere and
                            quiet behavior, the lines to follow are simple and obvious . . . an economic
                            policy framed to stimulate production; a home policy of order and a better
                            understanding between the classes; a financial policy of economy. Above all
                            the fundamental truth is always the same, however unpleasant and inflexible:
                            consume less and produce more . . . what is more necessary than anything else
                            is to restore the confidence of capitalists . . . the principles of recent English
                            legislation must be adopted.

                            “Translation of extract from a speech delivered at Melfi on March 12, 1922 by
                            Signor Nitti” (FO 371/7669, fols.198–200, my emphasis)



                     After World War I, Britain and Italy passed sweeping austerity legis-
                     lation on the same timeline and with many of the same component
                     policies. Britain was a long-standing parliamentary democracy with
                     well-established institutions and orthodox Victorian values. It had en-
                     joyed centuries of global financial and economic hegemony. Italy, on
                     the other hand, was economically backward, fresh from Bolshevik rev-
                     olutionary surges and civil strife during and after the war. Why, then,
                     were two very different countries seemingly operating in tandem to
                     reconfigure their domestic economies?
                         The British and Italian stories are actually profoundly intertwined.
                     The nature of austerity is such that its domestic policies are set with


                     246




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   246        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.               6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     an outside view in mind: the Italian economists in particular sought
                     to make Italian goods and currency valuable and accessible to for-
                     eign markets, especially Britain, which would in turn facilitate capi-
                     tal accumulation within Italy. Economic technocrats in both countries
                     sought to sow austerity beyond their borders so as to guarantee the
                     stability of capitalism as a global economic system—a system that had
                     been unprecedentedly shaken by the war. Domestic welfare was not
                     a component of their thinking. The relationship between Fascist Italy
                     and Britain is emblematic of a perverse partnership in which tradi-
                     tional ideological boundaries—including those between liberalism and
                     fascism—were bridged in the name of economic necessity.
                         For Italy, the lesser of the two economies, it is worth asking: was
                     austerity really a sovereign choice? In a way it undoubtedly was. As
                     discussed in chapter 7, Italy’s economic experts had a lucid understand-
                     ing of austerity policies as a weapon against internal class struggle and
                     a means of securing capital accumulation among the virtuous savers/
                     entrepreneurs. To these ends, and for these few, austerity was success-
                     ful. Italian austerity was backed by the commanding domestic tradition
                     of pure economics and household names such as Pantaleoni, Pareto,
                     Ricci, and Einaudi. These professors, however, did not limit their gaze
                     to Italy. They were also engaged with, and inspired by, technocrats from
                     British political economy. The Italian economists were, as the British
                     embassy repeated, “deeply imbued with the classical British tradition”
                     (July 10, 1925, FO 371/10784, fol. 37).
                         Moreover, to fully explain why austerity thrived in Italy, we need
                     to tell another side of the story: how foreign interests influenced—and
                     in some cases defined—the rebuilding of a country that had teetered
                     on the brink of Bolshevism. By the 1920s Italy was a country with sub-
                     stantial war debt, and was heavily reliant on imports of goods and raw
                     material. In other words, it was a country beholden to others: funda-
                     mentally dependent on foreign capital and credit for its economic in-
                     vestment and development. Italy’s position of dependence meant that
                     international creditors could exert strong pressures—including pres-
                     sures that would open Italy to foreign investment, even at the expense
                     of the Italian people. This came in the form of austerity.


                                                                                                     247




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   247        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                         This chapter’s epigraph is taken from a 1922 speech by the econo-
                     mist and Italian prime minister Francesco Saverio Nitti, who explic-
                     itly calls for “austere and quiet behavior” from the Italian people in
                     order to restore the “confidence of capitalists”—in particular, credit
                     and investment. Nitti cautioned that any such credits from foreign
                     countries would be illusory until the government changed economic
                     policies to reflect the “unpleasant truth” of austerity: “consume less and
                     produce more.”
                         Britain had stakes in the game, too. As in the Italian case, these
                     stakes were at once political—to prevent revolution—and eco-
                     nomic—to increase profitable venues for its capital and commodities.
                     Indeed, an increase of exports to Italy was crucial in the mind of the
                     British technocrats, who were all betting on the expansion of external
                     demand to compensate for their austerity-induced suppression of in-
                     ternal consumption. Under austere Fascism, trade between Italy and
                     Britain intensified considerably relative to the prewar period. England
                     was second only to the United States as the primary supplier of imports
                     to Italy, especially coal and wool. A substantial share of Italy’s exports,
                     especially silk and motorcars, went to Britain.
                         British technocrats understood that the groundwork for insulating
                     capitalism in Italy would take the form of austerity, and implementing
                     that austerity would require a strong government. The British found
                     those conditions in the form of Mussolini’s dictatorship; Fascism imi-
                     tated the principles of austerity. The British were not alone in this. Sim-
                     ilarly to the austerity motives of liberal economists within Italy they
                     reflected a wider international consensus that proved fundamental in
                     order for Fascism to gain legitimacy and consolidate its rule.
                         This chapter builds on the 1971 classic book by Gian Giacomo Mi-
                     gone, The United States and Fascist Italy: The Rise of American Finance in
                     Europe (translated in English in 2015), which documented the substan-
                     tial hand that American financiers—especially those at J. P. Morgan—
                     lent to Mussolini’s rule. Indeed, as Migone explores, Fascist Italy acted
                     as a key agent for the expansion of American capitalism in Europe af-
                     ter World War I. Unlike all other European countries, America was



                     248




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   248        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     not weakened after the war, but strengthened: the US had doubled its
                     gross national product and its exports and held a credit balance with
                     the rest of the world of $12.562 billion (Migone 2015, 2). After the war,
                     through substantial industrial austerity, the US subordinated its work-
                     ing classes, preventing “organized workers from obtaining a substantial
                     redistribution of profits within American society and stopped them
                     from building any international networks that might be a resource
                     for strengthening their autonomy” (ibid., 15). The country was sitting
                     on an overabundance of liquid capital and an ever-greater quantity of
                     goods and services that were ready for export. Given the isolationist
                     tenor of US politics in the 1920s, the expansion of American capital
                     in Europe and the relationship between Europe and the US was left to
                     informal channels; “these channels, of course, were dominated by the
                     New York financial establishment, and in particular by the House of
                     Morgan” (ibid., 136).
                         The following pages explore how the influence of American and
                     British capital over Mussolini’s economic policy was specifically fo-
                     cused around austerity, with the particular objective of sealing capital-
                     ist class relations under an international order.
                         This arc began with the capitalism crisis leading up to Mussolini’s
                     ascent, then extended to the international establishment’s views on the
                     necessary relationship between austerity and a strong state, which in
                     turn coined the elite establishment’s rationalization of political vio-
                     lence. It concludes with an exploration of the thorny issue of Italy’s war
                     debt settlement and the effort to achieve the gold standard—two cases
                     where the international pressure for austerity was profound and the
                     benefits for the Italian people were nonexistent.

                     The Problem of Italian Dependence

                     After the war, Italy was not economically self-sufficient. Italian bu-
                     reaucrats articulated the country’s problem of foreign dependence ex-
                     plicitly: “Unlike France, or even Germany, Italy cannot isolate herself
                     without perishing. She either lacks all together, or only possesses in



                                                                                                     249




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   249        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     insufficient quantities, all the more necessary raw material, she has an
                     enormous adverse balance of foodstuffs and fats, and she lacks iron,
                     coal, fertilizers, textiles, etc.” (FO 371/7669, fol. 196).
                         Italy’s crisis of trade imbalance escalated. The armistice in 1918
                     brought an end to both the fighting and the wartime agreements
                     around exchange rates and the decontrol of currencies. The likely ex-
                     cess of imports over exports that followed would immediately degrade
                     the exchange rate for Italian currency. A devalued lira not only meant
                     an increase of the country’s burden of external debt; it also promised
                     more expensive imports, an increase in domestic prices, and a setback
                     of industrial activity based on a lack of raw materials.
                         In January 1919, Italian minister of industry Giuseppe De Nava
                     wired an anxious message to the British prime minister, David Lloyd
                     George. Italy’s lack of coal, De Nava warned, was hampering “indus-
                     trial reconstruction and the solution of the already serious labour prob-
                     lem” (T 1/12343/10710/19). The British ambassador to Italy, Sir J. Rennell
                     Rodd, projected bleak consequences: “The closing down of the great fac-
                     tories in the North of Italy, with the cost of living at its present prohibi-
                     tive price and the inflammable condition of the popular mind, would
                     bring the menace of revolution perilously near . . . unemployment and
                     shortage of food may make desperate the most amenable of mankind.”
                         More than just coal, wool and meat were also missing. As a Treasury
                     file of 1919 revealed, “there are many other commodities, equally impor-
                     tant to the economic life of the country, which are not imported at the
                     present time, merely on account of lack of finance” (T 1/12343/10710/19).
                     A continuation along the vicious spiral of high indebtedness—which
                     discouraged creditors and worsened monetary instability—could even
                     result, many feared, in a full-blown monetary breakdown in which the
                     lira lost all purchasing power.
                         While appreciating the difficulties facing the Italian people, British
                     chancellor of the exchequer Andrew Bonar Law made plain that the
                     British Treasury had “great difficulties to face itself ” (ibid.). In Febru-
                     ary 1919, Britain announced that it would curtail the credits previously
                     allowed to Italy, occasioning real and profound panic among Italian
                     bureaucrats. After intense financial negotiations between the two trea-


                     250




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   250        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     suries, an agreement was reached that secured for Italy a substantial
                     public loan. The agreement specified that the loan was to be “used in the
                     first place for repaying all outstanding debts due to British departments”
                     (T 1/12367/35323), and would be followed by another stream of credit in
                     August 1919, which Niemeyer and Blackett had approved.
                         Given Italy’s grave and worsening dependence on foreign credit, the
                     1919 British loans were not enough. Italian leaders continued desper-
                     ately to call for aid to prevent a complete political breakdown—a break-
                     down, they stressed, that would not go unfelt by their British allies.
                         In April 1920, Sir Edward Henry Capel-Cure, commercial counselor
                     of the British embassy in Rome, reported on his conversation with the
                     Italian minister of finance, Signor Carlo Schanzer (a man who would
                     later participate in the Genoa conference and profusely endorse aus-
                     terity). In Capel-Cure’s interview—which was immediately transmit-
                     ted to the British Treasury—Schanzer warned that the financial condi-
                     tion of Italy was “almost untenable” given the high costs of imports. He
                     lamented how “expenditure at this rate could mean nothing short of
                     national bankruptcy and, what was more, revolution” (April 14, 1920,
                     T 1/12551/1). Capel-Cure emphasized to those at home that Schanzer’s
                     warnings were not to be underestimated: “The minister repeated the
                     word [‘revolution’] several times, and it is the first occasion, in my
                     fairly intimate personal knowledge of him, on which I remember his
                     not having veiled an expression of this description.” Capel-Cure re-
                     capped Schanzer’s preoccupations in the meeting—“The revolution, he
                     said, would undoubtedly spread to France and to Switzerland . . . the
                     Bol[s]chevistic element was only too painfully apparent” (ibid.). The
                     urgent message was clear, as Capel-Cure conveyed: it was in England’s
                     interest to take the burning question of Italy’s exchange into “immedi-
                     ate and most serious consideration” (ibid., 2).
                         Meanwhile, the Italian minister of Treasury Signor Luzzatti stressed
                     to others outside Italy that granting credit was no mere charity, but rather
                     a matter of mutual interest in preventing revolution. Italy was a nation
                     “whose dire stress might be the means of producing a conflagration,”
                     Luzzatti warned, noting that such developments “might spread to Eng-
                     land herself ” (ibid., ff. 4). British financiers were aware that the stakes


                                                                                                      251




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   251        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     in Italy were inextricably economic and political. A memorandum writ-
                     ten by the banker Sir Herbert Hambling, for example, was adamant that
                     political chaos would not only threaten capitalist civilization generally,
                     but would bring the immediate loss of British capital already invested.
                        Given the British Treasury’s reluctance to contribute further, Italy’s
                     financial hope rested in private hands—that is, American and British
                     private banks. Of course, this would not come at zero cost. Capel-Cure
                     reported as part of his conversation with Schanzer: “As a matter of fact I
                     have been told a few days ago, by the head of the bank that tried to raise
                     the ten million for Signor Schanzer in August, that the city of London
                     would probably not entertain any proposal from Italy [to raise a private
                     loan] until the [public] subsidy was taken off bread, and other better-
                     ments of the finances began” (April 14, 1920, T 1/12551/4). Capel-Cure
                     here planted an early seed of austerity: Italy needed to cut its public
                     subsidies if financial assistance were even to be considered. This type of
                     imperative, as we know, would multiply.
                        The Italian and British establishments coalesced around a shared
                     narrative of the problem: to understand the Italian economic crisis,
                     “the political reason was to be put in the first line” (April 12, 1920,
                     T 1/12551/1). Italy’s economic problems could only be solved after ad-
                     dressing its political problems. After all, strikes and redistributive poli-
                     cies were primary factors “in the nervousness shown abroad towards
                     Italy’s finance,” and moreover, foreign financial observers understood
                     notions like taxes on profits or luxury goods as an expression of “the
                     selfishness and the cupidity of individuals and classes” in Italy (ibid.).
                     Here again, the blame fell on the majority of the population—backward
                     masses who consumed too much and produced too little.
                        By the summer of 1922, economic conditions in Italy had not im-
                     proved. On July 4, the office of the British commercial counselor wrote
                     to the British ambassador to Italy, Ronald William Graham, to inform
                     him about “an interesting article” published in Il messaggero, titled “For-
                     eign Criticism of Italian Financial Policy” (July 4, 1922, FO 371/7656,
                     fols. 267–69). The article discussed the “widespread and growing dis-
                     trust” toward Italy in foreign financial circles. It suggested that foreign
                     interests were particularly “alarmed at the methods of taxation, and


                     252




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   252        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     at the readiness which the Italian Government shows to impose bur-
                     dens on foreign money invested in Italy, and at its alleged disregard to
                     its obligations.” Special reference was made to a capital levy [tassa sul
                     patrimonio]. Disparaging conclusions followed: “the result may be not
                     only to prevent foreign capital from coming to Italy, but also to induce
                     those who have already invested in the country to realize their holdings
                     and take their money away.”
                         Later that July, Capel-Cure expressed deep dissatisfaction with the
                     country’s lack of resolve: “The Italian government has to cope with a
                     number of white elephants. Their railways, posts, and telegraphs pres-
                     ent a continuously increasing deficit to be met sooner or later by the
                     taxpayer” (July 21, 1922, FO 371/7656, fol. 283). Capel-Cure argued that
                     wage increases were a central part of the problem: “government officials
                     and employees who are organized under trade unions have been able to
                     exact from the state a considerable amount of salaries and wages.” The
                     British commercial counselor warned that this trend could spread to
                     non-unionized workers and further deplete state finances (ibid.).
                         The British Foreign Office joined the choir of criticism of Italy: “The
                     central government is weak and embarrassed; the administration inef-
                     ficient; the civil service disloyal; the army in a state of chaotic reorgani-
                     zation . . . the agrarian situation is menacing . . . the internal and exter-
                     nal prestige of the Italian government has seriously declined” (June 22,
                     1922, FO 371/7669, fol. 191, 6).
                         These critics agreed that the only way out for Italy was British-style
                     austerity. In light of this dictum, the right man at the right time was
                     soon to grapple with the problem of Italian financial dependence.

                     Austerity and the Strong State

                     Signor De Stefani: The Good Soldier of Austerity

                     As Capel-Cure had noted earlier, the “political complexion” of Italy
                     mattered to its financial rehabilitation (FO 371/7656, fol. 284). On Oc-
                     tober 27, 1922, the day before the March on Rome and the establishment
                     of the Italian Fascist state, British ambassador to Italy Ronald William


                                                                                                     253




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   253        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Graham reported to his superiors on the worsening state of the lira-
                     sterling exchange, framing it as a political problem: “the sudden de-
                     preciation of the value of the lira is attracting special attention in the
                     Italian press and the comments are gloomy. In nationalist quarters it
                     is ascribed to the internal state of the country and a need of a strong
                     government” (October 27, 1922, FO 371/7656, fols. 287–88).
                        The ambassador’s next dispatch—written a week after Mussolini’s
                     seizure of power—took a more optimistic tone: “I have the honour
                     to report that the political events of the last week appear to have had
                     a favourable effect on the Italian exchange” (November 3, 1922, FO
                     371/7656, fol. 290). The reasons for optimism were straightforward.
                     Once in power, Mussolini quickly set the capital-friendly priorities
                     straight. On November 10, 1922, the British embassy announced that in
                     Italy plans were afoot for guaranteeing investments of foreign capital,
                     and in particular for ensuring that such capital would not be subject to
                     taxation in either Italy or the country of origin.
                        The Times discussed how the attracting of capital offered a compel-
                     ling case “for the complete abolition of succession and death duties.”
                     Such priorities should remain without limit, even, the newspaper ar-
                     gued, if it meant “a considerable and immediate reduction in the rev-
                     enue.” This argument was in line with the crux of austerity’s logic: bal-
                     ancing the budget served as a pretext for the actual objective of shifting
                     resources in favor of capital accumulation. This objective took prece-
                     dence over anything else.
                        Only a year later, in December 1923, British ambassador Graham
                     reassured British observers that the previously broken trust was being
                     mended. “Foreign capital had overcome the not unjustified diffidence
                     of the past, and was once again coming to Italy with confidence.” Gra-
                     ham contrasted the incapacity of Italy’s decadent postwar parliamen-
                     tary democracy, in its instability and corruption, with the efficient eco-
                     nomic management of De Stefani’s ministry.
                        Indeed, the foreign liberal press extolled De Stefani. He attracted
                     praise from American and British financial circles for two compelling
                     and interrelated reasons: first, his resoluteness as an expert—“too often
                     lacking in a professional politician”—and second, his laudable com-


                     254




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   254        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     mitment to British-style austere values. The Times introduced him as
                     an Italian version of “an Oxford don,” a man whose collaborators were
                     “soaked in the English economists.” These virtuous Italians’ “uncon-
                     cealed ideal” was “to apprehend and copy the British system of public
                     finance” (“Fascismo,” The Times, July 2, 1923, 13). In the Economist,
                     Luigi Einaudi wrote an article titled “An Italian Geddes Committee”
                     that highlighted how “Signor De Stefani laid great stress on the efficacy
                     of the British Treasury in checking expenses and controlling expendi-
                     ture departments.” Similar praises came from the British Embassy in
                     Rome. Graham spoke of De Stefani as “a theoretical economist by train-
                     ing and profession” who had framed for himself “a programme which
                     practically consisted in balancing the budget and declining all tempta-
                     tions to inflate the currency” (July 10, 1925, FO 371/10784, fol. 37).
                        Both The Times and the Economist stressed that one of De Stefani’s
                     greatest virtues was “the courage to brave unpopularity,” which allowed
                     him to pursue austerity measures with “a dogmatic certainty of opin-
                     ion” (“Fascismo,” The Times, July 2, 1923, 13). And indeed, De Stefani’s
                     willingness “to tame men” in the face of popular opposition was a hard-
                     won impulse born of his training in pure economics. The professor’s
                     bravery came from his school’s self-proclaimed mission of realizing
                     “rigorous and elegant [economic] laws” (Ricci 1926, 104–5).
                        De Stefani’s alacrity was also doted on by the liberal press: “he lives,
                     sleeps, eats in the ministry, and his day is 8 to 8 with half an hour for
                     lunch, for seven days in the week. I suspect that this superactivity is due
                     to his not unnatural mistrust for the officials whom he has inherited.”
                     Of course, as the press also knew, but seemingly refrained from writing,
                     De Stefani’s ability to ignore social demands was only partially due to
                     his resolute personality: the expert could use his “firm hand” because
                     he was part of the firm grip of an authoritarian state.

                     The Invincible Duo: Austerity
                     and Authoritarianism

                     In the weeks that followed Mussolini’s seizure of power, foreign observ-
                     ers noted the remarkable effectiveness of state power in implementing


                                                                                                     255




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   255        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     austerity. On November 3, 1922, a dispatch from British ambassador
                     Graham emphasized a breakthrough that had already occurred in both
                     economic policy and political power. He described plans for privatiza-
                     tion and reductions in public services, concluding that “[the] govern-
                     ment is much stronger than its predecessors for enforcing measures of
                     the above nature” (FO 371/7660, fol. 185).
                        The Times, meanwhile, defined Fascism as “an anti-waste govern-
                     ment” in the same breath in which it covered Mussolini’s opening
                     speech to the nation—a speech that was steeped in themes that were
                     objectively authoritarian and austere: “the guiding motives of our in-
                     ternal policy . . . may be summed up in three words—economy, work,
                     discipline. We must attain budgetary equilibrium as speedily as pos-
                     sible. . . . Respect of the law will be enforced at all costs. The State is
                     strong, and will display its force against all. . . . Whoever turns against
                     the State will be punished.”
                        In Mussolini’s senate address on June 8, 1923, the Duce asserted
                     that “the dominant fact in 1919–1920 . . . the occupation of the facto-
                     ries, the continual and permanent strike of state employees” had been
                     eliminated and punished, thanks to the Fascists’ replacement of a state
                     “devoid of virility” with one that “was growing stronger and stronger
                     and could impose discipline upon the nation” (ibid., fol. 75). The Brit-
                     ish embassy described this speech as “convincing”: “his speech shows
                     the Fascista movement in its true light as the reassertion of ‘authority’
                     against ‘liberty’ as the idea of government . . . the complete subordina-
                     tion of the rest to the Fascisti” (FO 371/8885, fol. 73).
                        The tone of British observations during the early days of the Fas-
                     cist regime was not condemnation, but a nodding appreciation for the
                     Fascist leader’s good sense. Graham, for example, said that for Italy,
                     “the chief failure lay in ‘parliamentarianism’” (FO 371/7660, fol. 198).
                     With its factious dynamics, parliamentarism—or democracy—only in-
                     creased ungovernability at a moment when grave economic necessity
                     and revolutionary threat called for something stronger.
                        Even Montagu Norman, the governor of the Bank of England, who
                     expressed wariness of the fact that under Fascism “anything in the




                     256




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   256        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     way of otherness” was “eliminated,” and “opposition in any form [was]
                     gone,” added in the same breath: “this state of affairs is suitable at pres-
                     ent and may provide for the moment the administration best adapted
                     for Italy.” He continued:

                        Fascism has surely brought order out of chaos over the last few years:
                        something of the kind was no doubt needed if the pendulum was not to
                        swing too far in quite the other direction. The Duce was the right man at
                        a critical moment. (Letter to John Pierpont “Jack” Morgan Jr., November
                        19, 1926, G1 307, fol. 27)


                     The international establishment’s support for a strong state was not an
                     outlier or an aberration. These sentiments pervaded British diplo-
                     matic circles and the British liberal press: Fascist dictatorship was an
                     unavoidable and necessary means to govern a turbulent country and
                     achieve sound economic objectives. Oliver Harvey, second secretary
                     of the British embassy in Rome, left no doubt as to the criterion for
                     this judgment: “the Mussolini experiment should stand on its merits
                     as a pure and unadulterated dictatorship, like that of Cincinnatus, to
                     be justified or otherwise by the gravity of the situation and by success”
                     (October 22, 1923, FO 371/8886, fol. 46). Dictatorships were only bad
                     when they were wrong.
                        After the regime’s first year in power, the embassy and the interna-
                     tional press continued to rejoice at Mussolini’s triumphs. He had suc-
                     ceeded in uniting political order with economic order, the very essence
                     of austerity. In Graham’s 1923 general report, circulated to the prime
                     minister, the ambassador continued to give high marks:

                        Eighteen months ago, any instructed observer of national life was bound
                        to come to the conclusion that Italy was a country on the downgrade. . . .
                        It is now generally admitted, even by those who dislike Fascismo and
                        deplore its methods, that the whole situation has changed . . . a strik-
                        ing progress towards the stabilization of State finances . . . strikers
                        [decreased] by 90 percent and working days lost [decreased] by over




                                                                                                     257




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   257        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                        97 percent, and an increase in national savings of 4,000 [million lire]
                        over the preceding year; indeed they exceed for the first time the pre-
                        war level by nearly 2,000 million lire. (FO 371/9946, fol. 246, 16)


                     These messages left no doubts: any preoccupation with Fascist political
                     abuse dwindled under the successes of its austerity. The chairman of
                     the British Italian Bank, J. W. Beaumont Pease, put it simply: auster-
                     ity’s success was about “strenuous work and thrift” under “the highest
                     conception of state authority.”
                         The Fascist state’s use of political repression and violence in its pur-
                     suit of capital accumulation would seem to offer a final test for the lib-
                     eral approvals around Mussolini and his regime. In their glossing over
                     and defending these abuses, the liberal establishment would quickly,
                     and thoroughly, fail that test.

                     Political Repression and the International
                     Double Standard

                     The celebrated successes of austerity in Italy—counted in terms like
                     industrial peace, high profits, and more business for the Brits—had a
                     repressive face, too, one that went far beyond such high-level develop-
                     ments as institutionalization of a strong executive and bypassing of Par-
                     liament. In Italy, Mussolini did not seek to shield his repressions from
                     public view; after all, he noted, “the measures adopted to re-establish
                     public order are, above all, the suppression of the so-called subversive
                     elements.”
                         International observers were aware, for example, that the Fascist
                     Squads, notorious for their cold-blooded violence during the turbulent
                     years of 1919–1922, had been made an integral part of the state appara-
                     tus, reinforcing the military character of the government. In July 1923,
                     amid public claims of unconstitutionality, the Grand Fascista Coun-
                     cil announced that these so-called Black Shirts formed “a formidable
                     and indivisible army destined to guarantee the continuance of the Fas-
                     cista government” (“Summary of Proclamation,” FO 371/8885, fol. 201).
                     This full-blown federal militia was a “large force to overawe his [Mus-


                     258




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   258        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     solini’s] political opponents,” necessary “so long as the state shall not
                     have become entirely Fascista” (July 30, 1923, FO 371/8885, fol. 184).
                        The British embassy reported on a variety of these proceedings: the
                     continuous aggression against political opponents; the burning of so-
                     cialist headquarters and of chambers of labor; the driving out of office
                     of various socialist mayors; electoral frauds or explicit intimidations of
                     voters at the polls (prior to elections being eliminated altogether after
                     three years of the regime); the execution of political enemies; the ar-
                     rest of communists; and several notorious political homicides—most
                     importantly the murder of the Socialist deputy Giacomo Matteotti,
                     who had opposed the government and its elections.
                        The American and British financial circles’ treatment of the “Mat-
                     teotti Affair” is emblematic of the prioritization of economic results
                     over political freedom (and seemingly over concerns around political
                     violence). The Times and the Economist both treated the killing as the
                     Italian government’s occasion “to clean up the Ministry of the Interior”
                     and to rid Mussolini’s government and party of disgraceful elements.
                     Mussolini could strengthen and normalize the party by expelling its
                     extremist fringes (Migone 2015, 55), which would be justified if it gave
                     better footing to the financial orthodoxy of Mussolini and De Stefani.
                     Elsewhere, in a campaign speech during the height of the Matteotti
                     crisis, US Secretary of State Andrew Mellon ignored the accusations of
                     Mussolini’s abuse of power. Instead he spoke highly of the leader’s ca-
                     pacity to achieve a balanced budget and to free industry from govern-
                     ment regulation while ridding the country of the nefarious influence of
                     socialists (ibid., 56).
                        In the midst of the Matteotti crisis, the chairman of the British-
                     Italian Banking Corporation, Beaumont Pease, explicitly defended
                     the Fascist government against any rumor of instability, calling in-
                     stead for its assistance and “cordial sympathy.” Pease claimed that in
                     his position—“unique” in England—as the leader of the only “British
                     banking institution dealing almost exclusively with Italian affairs,” he
                     could ascertain not only the flourishing of his own profits but more
                     generally “the industrial prosperity established by Mussolini” and the
                     “resulting benefit to British Industry.” He declared: “By trusting the Ital-


                                                                                                     259




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   259        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     ians we have secured a great deal of business for British manufacturers
                     which would otherwise have gone to Germany, America and elsewhere,
                     and never once have we been let down financially” (“The British-Italian
                     Banking Corporation, Limited,” Economist, March 21, 1925, 559ff.).
                         The chairman’s main justification for austerity was the usual one:
                     “there is no responsible Italian who does not deplore the excess and
                     misdemeanors which have been committed [by Mussolini],” yet “there
                     is hardly one who would not admit the benefit the country has derived
                     from the policy of the present government.” Of course, such supposed
                     national benefit came in the form of industrial, monetary, and fiscal
                     austerity. These policies were anything but beneficial to the majority of
                     Italian citizens.
                         Pease’s words are remarkable and bring forward a mode of rational-
                     ization that was typical of the British liberal establishment: “It seems
                     to me that there is no particular cause for anxiety. . . . We can well
                     disregard such of their internal methods as may be unpalatable to us,
                     and trust them to find their own means of working out their salva-
                     tion, towards which they have already gone a long way.” The intellectual
                     maneuvering here was explicit: economic and political considerations
                     were separate and distinct—and unequal—realms of judgment. How-
                     ever uncomfortable an authoritarian political setting might be, it was
                     the necessary one to achieve economic success. And it was also the case
                     that economic recovery was the sole universal standard upon which
                     to judge the Fascist regime; the ends might yet justify the means. Fur-
                     thermore, one had to be tolerant: the political regime was up to the
                     Italians to handle.
                         Observers ultimately agreed that what was inadmissible in a country
                     with a democratic tradition—especially an Anglo-Saxon country—was
                     instead well-suited for the Italian citizen after World War I. The Times
                     articulated this double standard: “It seems improbable that under his
                     [Mussolini’s] system[,] democracy, in the British sense, can survive in
                     Italy. But critics do not always realize how totally different is the mean-
                     ing of democracy in the two countries, and frequently forget that before
                     Signor Mussolini came into power the position of the Italian Parlia-
                     ment was one of deep humiliation.”


                     260




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   260        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                         Governor Norman agreed: “Italy is not a free country in the usual
                     sense of the word, and certain things are lacking which in a liberal
                     country like England are apt to be missed, for instance, freedom of
                     speech, freedom of the Press, freedom of politics and so on. But the
                     fact remains that she has made economic and financial progress. . . .”
                     Italian people were different from British people, and the former were
                     not going to miss democracy or other liberal values.
                         At the Bank of England, an anonymous handwritten document from
                     1925 titled “Fascist Italy—Fascist Methods” articulated this double stan-
                     dard in stark terms. The document contained an inventory of Fascist
                     oppression in its human terms, including the firings of all public ser-
                     vants “who might be inclined to indulge in anti-fascist activities” (OV
                     36/1, fol. 17), the dissolution of all non-Fascist municipalities, and the
                     complete control over those municipalities by the podestà (central gov-
                     ernment officials who superseded elected local authorities). Moreover,
                     it noted, “apart from bludgeoning and castor-oil, murder has been re-
                     sorted to on a large scale—not only in the early days, but since the party
                     came into power, for the purpose of suppressing obnoxious adversar-
                     ies” (ibid.). The memo ended with a list of the regime’s major political
                     murders. However, far from being denounced, these facts of political
                     abuse were reported with a tone of “realism” regarding the inferior con-
                     ditions of Italians:

                        [T]he Italian people are the descendants of Roman slaves. After the de-
                        cay of the Roman power, they remained for some fourteen centuries
                        under the domination of various warring sets of foreigners . . . slave
                        peoples are generally incapable of governing themselves . . . so it is that
                        democratic government in Italy, which has never been a conspicuous
                        success, broke down utterly when the strain of the great war had pro-
                        duced exceptionally severe moral degeneration among the unstable Ital-
                        ian people . . . the nation was ripe for bolshevism . . . but the nation—or
                        perhaps its non-latin-rulers?—was not ripe for suicide. . . . Mussolini
                        and his Fascists seized power and restored order. They rule the country
                        today by force according to their own will, and the people are reduced
                        to the servitude which had been their lot for a score of centuries. (ibid.)


                                                                                                      261




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   261        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     The argument in favor of Mussolini’s dictatorship thus took various
                     shades: there were bluntly racist remarks like those above, alleging the
                     ultimate incapacity of “Latins” to be democratic; or a slightly milder
                     line that played on cultural relativism and pragmatic good sense. Noth-
                     ing else, it seemed, could save such a cursed country.
                         Indeed, if observers raised doubts, they were not out of concerns for
                     democracy, but rather for what would happen in the absence of Mus-
                     solini. This worry was palpable within the Bank of England, with its
                     1926 memo: “if that system fails . . . anything could happen, including
                     civil war and chaos” (November 13, 1926, G1/307, fol. 22). In June 1928,
                     Einaudi wrote in the Economist that he worried about a lack of political
                     representation, but that he worried more about a lack of capital order.
                     He spoke of the “very grave questionings” in the minds of the English-
                     men: “When, again, in the inevitable course of nature the strong hand
                     of the great Duce is removed from the helm has Italy another man of
                     his calibre? Can any age produce two Mussolinis? If not, what next?
                     Under weaker and less wise control may not chaotic revulsion follow?
                     And with what consequences, not merely for Italy, but for Europe?”
                     (“The Corporative State in Italy,” Economist, June 23, 1928, 1273ff.).
                         Even in that summer of 1928, the ghosts of the earlier capitalist cri-
                     sis years still loomed large. In commemorating former prime minister
                     Giovanni Giolitti’s career, the Economist focused on a dark spot therein:
                     “Unhappily he was a partisan of the ‘wait and see’ policy up to the point
                     of not interfering when workmen, in September, 1920, invaded indus-
                     trial establishments and rural workers occupied private lands” (“The
                     Late Signor Giolitti,” Economist, August 4, 1928, 228).
                         The liberal international establishment was so enamored of Mus-
                     solini’s implementation of austerity that it rewarded the regime with
                     the financial resources to further solidify the country’s political and
                     economic rule—in particular through settlement of its war debt and
                     stabilizing the lira. As US Federal Reserve governor Benjamin Strong
                     affirmed in 1927, Italy’s display of “self-discipline and capacity for sacri-
                     fice” granted the country the right to be supported in its plan to achieve
                     the gold standard (see Migone 2015, 189).
                         These rewards from liberal institutions elsewhere ignored that Italy’s


                     262




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   262        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     bootstrapping self-discipline was, in reality, the authoritarian rule of
                     Mussolini. The prime minister’s agenda to impose “self-sacrifice” upon
                     the working classes—including the suppression of their wages, working
                     rights, and sheer livelihood—amounted to deflation by violent means.

                     Debt and the Consolidation of the Lira

                     British and American financiers were more than just supportive spec-
                     tators of Fascist austerity. Their acceptance of Mussolini’s regime
                     within the capitalist international order was crucial for the regime’s
                     consolidation.
                        In a letter to his finance minister during the early summer of 1925,
                     when international speculative attacks continued to ravage the lira,
                     Mussolini displayed full cognizance of the unavoidable interdepen-
                     dence with international capital:

                        We must realize that we are confronting the whole financial world’s lack
                        of faith in Italian finance, a lack of faith that explains and provokes spec-
                        ulation lowering currency value. As long as this lack of faith did not have
                        internal consequences, the situation presented no imminent danger; but
                        the day that politics crosses the border (and in the long run it is in-
                        evitable), the distrust will spread throughout the country and cause de-
                        positors to withdraw their funds (which amount to $51 billion), and the
                        regime would have no power to stop the collapse. (Migone 2015, 179–80)


                     Mussolini’s message was clear: international financial confidence could
                     make or break the Fascist regime. Settling the war debt and achieving
                     the gold standard were the surest paths to guaranteeing the durabil-
                     ity of that confidence. Notably, this agenda of Mussolini’s presupposed
                     proving the country’s creditworthiness through austerity.
                         Ever since the end of the Great War, the US and British Treasuries
                     had denied Italy’s pleas for war-debt cancellation. Thus, from the on-
                     set of the Fascist regime, the Anglo-American financiers unanimously
                     described Mussolini as being “most anxious to come to an agreement
                     as to Italy’s debt at the earliest possible moment.” Of course, debt


                                                                                                     263




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   263        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     repayment involved the outflow of large amounts of capital and re-
                     quired a relatively large percentage of government revenues, requiring
                     further fiscal austerity. The Duce offered reassurances that his country
                     had good credentials in this respect given his haste in improving the
                     budget and guaranteeing industrial peace.
                        In the years preceding and following the debt settlements, the Brit-
                     ish embassy, the Treasury, the Bank of England, and these institutions’
                     American counterparts obsessively monitored Italian finances. These
                     watchdogs were happy with what they saw. Following a meeting in 1926
                     with Italian finance minister Giuseppe Volpi to discuss the war debt,
                     British chancellor of the exchequer Winston Churchill remarked: “I
                     have been greatly impressed by the immense progress made by Italy
                     under the present regime—a budget balanced under considerable sur-
                     pluses, as industry rapidly increases in importance, a favorable balance
                     in the international payments . . . an orderly and progressive govern-
                     ment, a thrifty and industrious population and an almost complete
                     absence of unemployment” (T 176/40, fol. 5, my italics). Notably,
                     Churchill’s praise for the tidiness of a once problematic nation included
                     a checklist of austerity measures.
                        The debt settlements with the US and Britain of 1925 and 1926, re-
                     spectively, were necessary for Italy to achieve the gold standard because
                     they opened up access to further credit. Indeed, the collaboration of
                     the Bank of England and the US Federal Reserve—the two institutions
                     that controlled the mechanisms of the stabilization procedure—was
                     contingent on debt settlement, which had the added benefit of granting
                     Italy access to foreign capital markets. Immediately after Italy dealt
                     with its dues, J. P. Morgan Chase Bank signed off on a loan of $100 mil-
                     lion to support the stabilization of the lira.
                        The Fascist state zealously publicized its compliance with the in-
                     ternational code of austerity, to the point that De Stefani arranged
                     the “regular transmission of the publications of a financial charac-
                     ter” to the British Foreign Office (October 15, 1924, FO 371/9936,
                     fol. 96). Theirs was a tenacious application of austerity, one that con-
                     vinced international markets to shift from speculating downward to




                     264




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   264        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     speculating upward in favor of the revaluation of the lira, starting in
                     October 1926.
                         The “British experts [tecnici] . . . are our most shrewd critics,” Volpi
                     wrote to Mussolini in 1926. The day after the regime announced gold
                     parity, Chancellor Churchill wrote to offer his “heartiest congratula-
                     tions” for an achievement that “crowns the great work you have done
                     for the re-establishment of Italian finances” (December 26, 1927, FO
                     371/12198, fol. 236). The great work of austerity included a forced re-
                     duction of internal consumption to improve the balance of trade. By
                     1927 the government reported that “imports have fallen by 21, exports
                     have increased in quantity” (FO 371/12947, fol. 163). This meant a “pa-
                     triotic cooperation of the Italian people” (September 1, 1926, OV 36/1,
                     fol. 16)—who consumed less and worked harder in a labor market that
                     the state had purged of any independent representation.
                         Indeed, international financial experts explicitly pressured Fascism
                     to defeat labor’s demands. For example, while examining Italy’s request
                     for a stabilization loan, Fed governor Strong urged Italy to maintain its
                     balance of trade with a further reduction of cost of living and wages,
                     which the governor of the Bank of Italy, Bonaldo Stringher, gave as-
                     surance he would achieve. The defeat of labor was such that, as the
                     British Embassy reported, “the leaders of the General Confederation of
                     Labour (the C.G.L), in view of the fact that their organization now only
                     exists on paper and as a name on a letterhead, have decided on its dis-
                     solution” (January 28, 1927, FO 371/12202, fol. 71). Ambassador Graham
                     concluded: “there is obviously no room for such an organization as the
                     C.G.L in the labour system developed by the present government, and
                     its existence could hardly be expected to continue” (ibid., fol. 72).
                         By exacting sacrifices on the working classes, Italy could finally par-
                     ticipate in the international capitalist order. After gold stabilization, the
                     Economist announced that it expected “foreign capital, mainly for the
                     United States and Great Britain,” to “seek more freely temporary or per-
                     manent investment in Italy.” The article praised the anti-inflationary
                     actions of the newly created central bank: “the Banca d’Italia will take
                     the necessary steps to prevent an inflow of foreign capital from result-



                                                                                                     265




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   265        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     ing in credit inflation and affecting the price levels.” As chapters 5 and
                     6 showcased, the technocratic project of an independent central bank
                     to keep inflation at bay was a central pillar of British austerity. It was the
                     only pillar that Fascism struggled to achieve.

                     An Independent Central Bank?

                     In the course of Italy’s austerity rehabilitation, the institution of lower
                     wages required a strong intervention by the Italian state on the labor
                     market. While international technocrats commended this melding of
                     economics and politics for its capacity to discipline the rebellious Ital-
                     ian workers, the melding of the economic and the political as it related
                     to monetary policy was less appreciated.
                        As part and parcel of its austerity efforts, Italy had followed the 1922
                     Genoa code that prescribed the formation of a central bank. The Banca
                     d’Italia, in existence since the nineteenth century, was granted status in
                     May 1926 as Italy’s central bank and the country’s sole bank of issue. At
                     that moment all of the gold or equivalent reserves were transferred to it,
                     along with a substantial increase of capital from the J. P. Morgan loan.
                        Bank of England governor Montagu Norman had received accounts
                     of the Banca’s deflationary measures since 1922. Following the bank’s
                     transition to being Italy’s central bank, Norman was profoundly trou-
                     bled by its formal and substantial lack of independence. The Bank of
                     Italy, just like the British one, was a joint-stock company—a private
                     body; however, it was still subject to political control. Its new statute
                     read: “The Minister of the Treasury has permanent supervision on the
                     Banca d’Italia, verifying annually the balance sheets and accounts, the
                     metallic reserve and so on.” Moreover, the Banca was formally obliged
                     to advance money to the government and could only change the bank
                     rate by order of the Minister of the Treasury (OV 36/22, fol. 108). Gov-
                     ernor Norman was disquieted by such an “attitude of Fascism” be-
                     ing extended to Italy’s monetary systems (October 28, 1926, G1/307,
                     fol. 9, 2). On various occasions and in letters to other central bankers,
                     Norman lamented the political subjugation of the Italian Banca’s gov-



                     266




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   266        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes


                     ernor, Bonaldo Stringher, to the point of questioning his own support
                     for the lira’s stabilization. His concerns matched those of other tech-
                     nocrats in Britain, including Hawtrey, Blackett, and Niemeyer.
                        In a letter to US Fed governor Strong on March 4, 1926, Norman
                     outlined his dissatisfaction with Finance Minister Volpi’s attitude to-
                     ward the Bank of Italy. After being admonished about the requisite
                     independence of the Bank for the purpose of “stabilization and coop-
                     eration,” Volpi had reaffirmed that “he himself was going to direct
                     Central Bank policy,” which Volpi regarded as a part of general finance
                     policy (G14/95, 1–2). Later, in November 1926, Norman wrote to his
                     colleague Hjalmar Schacht at the German Reichsbank: “Stringher is
                     about 70 years old and I guess has no more independence than a tail
                     of a kite. If he is a wise man he is probably happier without it, for the
                     power exercised by the fascisti leave no room for independence and
                     seem to extend further and to become more inquisitorial each time that
                     a gun is fired at the Duce” (November 5, 1926, G1/307).
                        Note that Norman’s problem with authoritarianism was not about
                     the deprivation of worker’s rights and liberties, but rather about the
                     prospect of stewarding the central bank via the whims of politics, which
                     could create “uncontrollable and unpredictable future circumstances,”
                     especially in the dreaded case of Mussolini’s financial experts changing
                     their minds regarding orthodoxy. The governor’s thoughts contained
                     no negative judgment of the regime’s political or economic choices. He
                     merely pointed out the problem of monetary policy not being “knave
                     proof ” to a possible change of the regime’s austere orientations. Nor-
                     man’s dilemma again highlights the double standard typical of the in-
                     ternational technocrats: political questions only mattered insofar as
                     they started to knock at the pearly gates of the economic domain.
                        For their part, J. P. Morgan and other bankers “were anxious” that
                     “stabilization should proceed whenever possible and Italy should natu-
                     rally be [the] next place”—i.e., whatever interventions were necessary
                     to stabilize the currency should be taken (cable of J. P. Morgan to Nor-
                     man, November 8, 1926, G1/307, fol. 15). US Fed governor Strong was
                     also determined to move ahead. He responded firmly to the doubts



                                                                                                     267




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   267        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     of his British colleague Norman, expressing a belief in the rightness of
                     prioritizing stabilization over Norman’s “conception of orthodox inde-
                     pendence” (November 26, 1926, G1/307, fol. 31). He gave reassurances
                     that the Italian finance minister had changed his tone: “Volpi has ex-
                     pressed the view to others,” he wrote, “that as rapidly as possible the
                     bank should be freed from political or state control” (ibid.).
                         Warmed by this reassurance, Norman wrote in October 1927, “I
                     do not think one should complain, especially if, as seems possible,
                     the measure of their independence is increasing”; and he announced
                     a forthcoming “comprehensive and cooperative account and under-
                     standing” between the British and Italian central banks. And to secure
                     the credit necessary for stabilization, the Italian regime set out to rein-
                     force the façade of an independent central bank. By the autumn of 1927
                     Strong was convinced: “I have received Signor Stringher’s assurance,”
                     he told Norman, “[that] the Banca d’Italia is established in a position
                     of independence and financial control” (November 29, 1927, G14/95).
                         Volpi, reading the room, had turned away from his previous stub-
                     bornness. A 1928 speech articulated his belief that “the position of the
                     Bank of Italy as controller of the money market is also clearly defined:
                     a sound capital situation, ample reserves, independent management,
                     and the possession of means for protecting the currency and control-
                     ling the money market.” Ultimately, the international financiers were
                     willing to believe this narrative because Italy was delivering on their
                     austerity agenda.
                         Technocracy prevailed in the matter of Italy’s central bank, even if
                     it didn’t exactly match the British case. For Hawtrey and his colleagues
                     at the Bank of England, the main reason for demanding an indepen-
                     dent central bank was to avoid any possible democratic supervision
                     of economic policies, thereby steering clear of people’s tampering with
                     austerity. The Italians achieved the same immunity from public criti-
                     cism with different methods. Rather than relying upon experts within
                     long-standing technocratic institutions, the Italian economic profes-
                     sors propped up strong and coercive executives who could deliver on
                     implementing their economic models.



                     268




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   268        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                           italian austerity and fascism through british eyes




                     Conclusion

                     This chapter scrutinizes the external forces that pushed for austerity in
                     Italy after World War I. In short, the commitment to austerity by inter-
                     national financial experts was so great that they were willing to rely on
                     a bloody dictatorship to reinstate the crumbling pillars of capital ac-
                     cumulation. All eyes turned toward Mussolini, whose dictatorship was
                     strong enough to finally tame the Italian people into being “disciplined,
                     silent, and peaceful.”
                         In this light, foreign onlookers evaluated and judged Fascism solely
                     in terms of its economic performance. These international experts were
                     agnostic when it came to political methods. To them, a violent dictator-
                     ship was akin to “Roman baroque architecture”: it would offend in a
                     different democratic climate, but in Italy it actually suited the country
                     and people quite well.
                         The explicit connection between austerity and political repres-
                     sion—so evident under Fascism—reveals how the economic treat-
                     ment of Italian citizens was not in fact so different from the treat-
                     ment the British experts envisioned for their own people. Indeed, as
                     chapter 6 has emphasized, British technocrats pushed hard for a non-
                     democratic implementation of economic policy through the indepen-
                     dence and authority of central banks. Even if different in nature, the
                     Italian and the British versions of technocracy shared a common end:
                     creating systems that imposed sacrifice on the majority of the public,
                     then insulating those systems from political interruption.
                         The consolidation of the Fascist regime coincided with the culmina-
                     tion of its austerity triumph, which was announced with Italy’s entry
                     into the “Gold Standard Club” in December 1927. This political con-
                     solidation, however, did not mean the liberation of the country from
                     its dependence on Anglo-American capital. On the contrary, Italian
                     monetary policy was now tied to a continuation of austerity in order
                     to maintain its gold parity—a bind that ultimately served the interests
                     of foreign financial capital, forevermore. In fact, budgetary equilibrium



                                                                                                     269




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   269        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     and the gold standard guaranteed the subservience of the debtor, Italy,
                     and allowed Anglo-American capitalists to elude competition with a
                     devalued lira that would otherwise enable Italy to export cheap prod-
                     ucts to the American and British markets.
                        These dynamics might sound familiar, as they were a precursor of
                     the relationship that the experts at the International Monetary Fund
                     (IMF) contrived and enact with most of the peripheral countries in the
                     world today: loans conditional upon austerity; a focus on “economic
                     freedom” rather than political freedom; and the compulsion to open a
                     country’s economy to international scrutiny. The Italian story helps
                     us to scrutinize other, more recent austere cases with a sharper eye.
                     On closer examination, these austerity-based adjustment programs
                     disclose the same underlying aim: taming the population to produce
                     more and consume less in order to safeguard capital accumulation.
                        The following chapter will provide empirical evidence of the “suc-
                     cess” of austerity in enforcing hard work and abstinence. The trends of
                     the 1920s provide insights on the reasons for the persistence of austerity
                     in the twenty-first century.




                     270




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   270        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 9

                     Austerity and
                     Its “Successes”




                     Austerity was, and remains, a shrewd endeavor. By critically studying
                     its origins and architects, we see again and again that austerity was con-
                     ceived, and succeeded, as a counteroffensive: it functions to preserve
                     the primacy and indisputability of capitalism in times when capitalism
                     is under political threat. And it does so by introducing structures—
                     policies—that shift resources from the working majority to the saver/
                     investor minority. The immediate distributional impacts have the im-
                     portant long-term function of disempowering the majority and thus
                     reinforcing the general acceptance of the pillars of capital accumula-
                     tion: private ownership of the means of production and wage relations.
                     You get what the boss gives you.
                         The Italian and British experts who ushered in austerity achieved
                     a great victory: they rehabilitated their capitalist economies through
                     models and policies that justified the economic superiority of a small
                     minority as the only road to economic recovery. This chapter pro-
                     vides a critical summary of the achievements of these two austerity
                     initiatives—with “achievements” in this usage not necessarily being
                     synonymous with “things that are good.”
                         What’s clear is that austerity is particularly effective not in stabiliz-
                     ing economies, but in stabilizing class relations. After all, austerity has
                     historically never been about curbing inflation and budget control; its



                                                                                                      271




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   271        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     manipulations of aggregate demand have always been a means to a
                     deeper end. Austerity secured the best possible conditions for profits
                     to soar, while the majority—the politically underserved—were forced
                     to relinquish all fledgling projects of economic democracy and to “live
                     harder” through lower wages and lower consumption. Austere capital-
                     ism produces losers and winners, and it always has.
                         The study of class shares (i.e., wage share versus profit share) pro-
                     vides a clear sense of the losers and winners of austerity, and in turn
                     its political implications. Class shares measure the portion of GDP
                     that goes to labor and to capital—the most immediate indicator of the
                     balance of forces between a society’s two main classes. The reassertion
                     of capital order, i.e., the primacy of capital over labor, is foundational
                     to promoting capitalist investment: capital does better when workers
                     are subordinated, wages are low, and regulation is minimal. Following
                     World War I, austerity’s knack for collapsing the wage share was vital
                     in a moment when the wage share had reached an unprecedented high,
                     stirring among workers great expectations of a breakaway from capital-
                     ist exploitation. Thus the political utility of austerity becomes obvious.
                     A rescue of the hierarchical labor-capital split meant an escape from
                     the capitalist crisis (and the egalitarian impulses that came with it) trig-
                     gered by the Great War.
                         To give a sense of who was part of “labor” and who was part of “capi-
                     tal,” it is useful to recall that in 1921 the British working classes en-
                     compassed more than 60 percent of the population, while the “owner
                     class” was roughly 7 percent (Gómez León and de Jong 2018). In Italy,
                     the propertied upper class (bourgeoisie) constituted only 1.7 percent
                     of the entire population, against a working class (in both agriculture
                     and industry) that was almost half of the population (Sylos Labini 1975,
                     Table 1.2). Given these tiny fractions of society that benefited from
                     austerity, the movement’s losers extended well beyond wage workers:
                     these groups comprised most of the middle classes that made up the
                     populations’ middle grounds—public employees, independent farmers,
                     soldiers, shopkeepers, and other professionals. While it is true that the
                     value of these professionals’ pensions and savings increased with defla-



                     272




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   272        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                     austerity and its “successes”


                     tion, that same deflation also spurred a loss of employment and a loss
                     of social benefits.
                         Measuring austerity’s economic effects in Britain and Italy also
                     corroborates one of the main claims of this book: that there is a
                     profound parallelism between austerity in a democratic setting and
                     austerity in a Fascist setting. In the 1920s, the repressive nature of
                     British austerity primarily took the form of market coercion: work-
                     ers were forced into compliance with the logic of capital accumu-
                     lation after the Treasury and the Bank of England devised policies
                     that triggered high unemployment and curtailed welfare rights. In-
                     creased economic necessity brought workers to their knees. The
                     Italian version of austerity did not need to rely on unemployment
                     as such, since it was accompanied by Fascist state interventions that
                     slashed nominal wages by decree and annihilated genuine worker’s
                     representation.
                         The two forms of austerity, Fascist and democratic, aligned in their
                     success at thwarting dissent. This can be seen in the similar rise-and-
                     fall patterns of worker strikes and the rise-and-fall patterns of compen-
                     sation and wage share. The data presented in this chapter illustrate how
                     the repressive drive of austere Italian Fascism behaved much the same
                     as austerity in the British parliamentary democracy, both after World
                     War I and today.

                     Class Shares, Exploitation, and Profit Rates

                     To grasp the political (and economic) implications of austerity, there
                     are three main timelines to consider: the wage share of national in-
                     come, the ratio of non-wage to wage incomes (known as the rate of
                     exploitation), and the profit rate.
                        Figure 9.1 shows the wage share—the portion of GDP that goes to
                     wages (i.e., the income of the working class) as opposed to profits (i.e.,
                     the income of the capitalist class). In essence this relation is zero-sum:
                     what is taken from one class is gained by the other.
                        The similarity of these patterns in Britain and Italy is striking.



                                                                                                     273




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   273        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                           80%

                           75%

                           70%

                           65%

                           60%

                           55%

                           50%

                           45%

                           40%

                           35%

                           30%
                                 13

                                       14

                                             15

                                                   16

                                                         17

                                                               18

                                                                     19

                                                                           20

                                                                                 21

                                                                                       22

                                                                                             23

                                                                                                   24

                                                                                                         25

                                                                                                               26

                                                                                                                     27

                                                                                                                           28

                                                                                                                                 29

                                                                                                                                       30
                            19

                                      19

                                            19

                                                  19

                                                        19

                                                              19

                                                                    19

                                                                          19

                                                                                19

                                                                                      19

                                                                                            19

                                                                                                  19

                                                                                                        19

                                                                                                              19

                                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                                          19

                                                                                                                                19

                                                                                                                                      19
                                                              Wage share in Italy (based on gross factor cost)
                                                              Wage share in Britain (whole economy excluding rents)

                     9.1. Wage share of national income for Italy and Britain. The wage share is calculated by subtracting from
                     the total nominal GDP the portion of GDP that constitutes the income from profits. (Sources: Gabbuti
                     2020a [for Italy] and Thomas and Dimsdale 2017 [for Britain].)




                     Britain’s maturity as an industrial society came with a century-long
                     tradition of industrial militancy which entailed that its workers
                     enjoyed a higher level of national income compared to their Ital-
                     ian counterparts. Moreover, the war years had a different impact on
                     the workforce of the two countries. In Italy, the wage share dropped
                     dramatically—from 44 percent in 1913 to 35 percent in 1918, a shift of
                     9 percentage points of national income from workers to capitalists.
                     Meanwhile, in Britain the wage share actually increased from 67 per-
                     cent in 1913 to 71 percent in 1918 (see figure 9.1). This phenomenon
                     illustrates a dynamic described at length in chapter 1: the Italian la-
                     bor force experienced a greater degree of militarization, whereas Brit-
                     ish unions retained a firmer voice in their role of collaboration with/
                     opposition to the state.
                         The years of postwar capitalist crisis saw a common surge of the
                     wage share, a fact of unprecedented and deep historical importance.



                     274




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   274        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                                          6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                     austerity and its “successes”


                     Never had workers in either country gained such a high proportion of
                     the national output. During these red years, the Italian wage share grew
                     to 49 percent in 1919 from 35 percent in 1918, and peaked at 55 per-
                     cent in 1922. This was a huge increase even compared to the prewar
                     levels (44 percent in 1913). It meant that in 1921, capital reaped fewer
                     fruits from economic growth than labor, something unseen until that
                     moment. Capital share dropped from 65 percent in 1918 to 45 percent
                     in 1922.
                        Though more moderate, the British case still looks quite impressive.
                     Wage share rose from 71 percent in 1918 to 78 percent in 1921. This was
                     an unprecedented increment with respect to the prewar years (in 1913
                     it was at 67 percent). Even if the surge is numerically not as striking
                     as the Italian case, two factors must be kept in mind to evaluate the
                     potentially explosive effect of the British circumstances. First, Brit-
                     ish workers were in possession of a significant amount of the GDP, a
                     measure of their strength, which gave them a greater voice in settling
                     economic agendas; second, that power had still increased like never
                     before. The troubles for capital were embodied in a 7-percentage-point
                     drop in profit share between 1918 and 1920 which swept away the war
                     gains. The postwar profit share was one-third of the prewar amount. As
                     in Italy, these class gains were also fuel for a movement to nationalize
                     and give British workers a central, potentially independent role in the
                     production process.
                        The austerity counteroffensive had an unequivocally uniform impact
                     on both countries: it reversed both countries’ labor gains dramatically.
                     Under Fascist austerity the gross wage share of Italian workers tumbled
                     throughout the 1920s, reaching a new low in 1929 when it touched the
                     level of 1913. Capital had gained back its dominant position. British la-
                     bor experienced a similar fall: by 1929 workers had lost all of their post-
                     war gains in share of national income.
                        Another way to visualize austerity’s dramatic impact on class rela-
                     tions is to look at the ratio between profits and wages, a tangible mea-
                     sure of the trend of exploitation. As figure 9.2 shows, in Britain exploi-
                     tation increased by 32 percent over the decade, while in Italy—from



                                                                                                     275




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   275        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity

                        2                                                                                                        0.5

                      1.8                                                                                                        0.45
                      1.6
                                                                                                                                 0.4
                      1.4
                                                                                                                                 0.35
                      1.2
                                                                                                                                 0.3
                        1

                      0.8                                                                                                        0.25

                      0.6                                                                                                        0.2
                            13
                                 14
                                      15
                                           16
                                                17
                                                      18
                                                           19
                                                                 20
                                                                      21
                                                                            22
                                                                                 23
                                                                                       24
                                                                                             25
                                                                                                  26
                                                                                                        27
                                                                                                             28
                                                                                                                     29
                                                                                                                      30
                        19
                             19
                                   19
                                        19
                                              19
                                                   19
                                                         19
                                                              19
                                                                    19
                                                                          19
                                                                               19
                                                                                     19
                                                                                          19
                                                                                                19
                                                                                                     19
                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                   19
                                              2 year moving average of Italy’s rate of exploitation
                                              2 year moving average of Britain’s rate of exploitation

                     9.2. Rate of exploitation in Italy and Britain. The rate of exploitation is calculated as the ratio between profit
                     share and wage share. Note that the two countries have different axes: the vertical axis on the left depicts
                     the Italian rate of exploitation, the one on the right the British rate of exploitation. (Author’s calculations.)



                     the start of Fascist austerity in 1922 until 1928—exploitation surged
                     by 54 percent. Here again these similar trends in the two countries
                     strongly counteracted the trends of the red years.
                        Higher exploitation is also reflected in productivity growth, which
                     combined with a decline in real compensation delivered a larger sur-
                     plus to the capitalists. In Britain this trend was strong in the early years
                     of austerity: between 1920 and 1922 labor productivity per head grew
                     from 18 percent to 20 percent, while real wages stagnated. In Italy the
                     dynamic of declining real wages and increasing productivity (up by
                     20 percent from 1922 to 1926) was pronounced until 1926, when the
                     instability of the lira promoted a price deflation that was faster than
                     the fall of nominal wages.
                        This increase in exploitation brought a surge in profit rates. Fig-
                     ure 9.3 shows that the profit rates for capital grew throughout the 1920s
                     in both countries. From 1920 until the end of the decade, the rate more
                     than tripled in Britain. A similar increase occurred in Italy, where be-
                     tween 1920 and 1926 profit rates also tripled.
                        In 1924, The Times reported on the success of Fascist austerity: “the
                     development of the last two years have seen the absorption of a greater
                     proportion of profits by capital, and this, by stimulating business enter-


                     276




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   276        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                                        6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                    austerity and its “successes”


                     prise, has most certainly been advantageous to the country as a whole”
                     (OV 36/22, f. 22). This type of narrative is typical, and is essential in the
                     selling and sticking of austerity doctrines throughout history: consen-
                     sus for public and popular sacrifice is built through the rhetoric of the
                     good of the whole.
                        Repression of internal demand in Italy was compensated by export-
                     led growth thanks to a strong world demand and a devalued lira. In-
                     deed, Italy’s 9.3 percent growth in real GDP in 1923 opened the doors
                     to three years of economic boom. The ensuing deflation in 1926–1927
                     had a negative impact on exports and real GDP (which dropped 3 per-
                     cent during 1927), but this fall in business was compensated by wage
                     suppression that guaranteed the endurance (and in this case, the quick
                     reversal) of profit rates. Italy’s real GDP growth was back to 6.3 percent
                     in 1928 (Gabbuti 2020b, 256).
                        A similar compensatory dynamic characterized the British case,
                     where the austerity-induced economic stagnation that lasted through-
                     out the 1920s was accompanied by stagnating nominal wages. Accord-
                     ingly, sluggish economic growth did not preclude the enrichment of
                     business owners. Rather, the austerity-induced downturn was vital to



                     37%
                     34%
                     31%
                     28%
                     25%
                     22%
                     19%
                     16%
                     13%
                     10%
                      7%
                      4%
                      1%
                        13
                              14

                                    15

                                         16

                                                17

                                                      18

                                                            19

                                                                  20

                                                                         21

                                                                              22

                                                                                     23

                                                                                           24

                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                      26

                                                                                                             27
                                                                                                                  28
                                                                                                                        29

                                                                                                                              30
                      19
                            19

                                  19

                                        19

                                              19

                                                    19

                                                          19

                                                                19

                                                                       19

                                                                             19

                                                                                   19

                                                                                         19

                                                                                               19
                                                                                                    19

                                                                                                           19
                                                                                                                19
                                                                                                                      19

                                                                                                                            19




                                                     Profit rate in Italy          Profit rate in Britain

                     9.3. Profit rate in Italy and Britain. The profit rate is calculated by dividing the profit share (nominal GDP
                     minus wage share) by the nominal value of the non-dwelling capital stock. (Author’s calculations.)




                                                                                                                               277




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   277        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                                    6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     securing a turnaround in the relations between capital and labor, which
                     in turn secured the existing wealth of the capitalist class.

                     On the Operation of Austerity

                     In Britain in 1920–1922, monetary deflation, combined with a colos-
                     sal cut in government expenditures (detailed in chapter 6), “defeated”
                     inflation through a massive economic downturn that ushered in a
                     period of unprecedented unemployment. In 1921 national unemploy-
                     ment skyrocketed from 2 percent to 11.3 percent. Almost 2.5 million
                     people left the labor force (Feinstein 1972). In the manufacturing sec-
                     tor alone, Britain lost almost 1.3 million jobs that year—almost one-
                     fourth of the entire manufacturing sector. From then on, the number
                     of the officially unemployed averaged around 1.7 million throughout
                     the decade, a number at least twice its prewar levels. This figure is
                     even more striking considering that Britain during the war was ap-
                     proaching full employment, with the unemployment rate as low as
                     0.3 percent in 1916.
                         An immediate consequence of Britain’s austerity-induced down-
                     turn was the wave of economic coercion that overtook British workers.
                     Amid rising unemployment, organized labor lost much of its political
                     power. By the end of the decade, only one-fourth of the working popu-
                     lation was unionized, down from almost 40 percent after the Great War
                     (see figure 9.4).
                         The number and intensity of British strikes (i.e., the percentage of
                     strikers relative to the labor force as a whole) are a good yardstick to
                     capture the strength and militancy of labor in the postwar years. As il-
                     lustrated in figures 9.5 and 9.6, both metrics tell a similar story around
                     union participation. In 1919 there were around 2,600,000 workers
                     (12 percent of the labor force) participating in strikes; by 1927 there
                     was almost a twofold drop (a 96 percent decrease). In that year worker
                     strikes reached rock bottom, with only 108,000 workers on the picket
                     lines (that is, 0.5 percent of the labor force). The 1926 general strike in-
                     terrupted this trajectory, but at a larger cost: the general strike is widely



                     278




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   278        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                    austerity and its “successes”


                     40%
                     38%
                     36%
                     34%
                     32%
                     30%
                     28%
                     26%
                     24%
                     22%
                     20%
                           13
                                   14
                                        15
                                             16
                                                   17
                                                         18
                                                               19
                                                                     20
                                                                           21
                                                                                22
                                                                                      23
                                                                                            24
                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                        26
                                                                                                              27
                                                                                                                    28
                                                                                                                          29
                                                                                                                                 30
                         19
                               19
                                     19
                                           19
                                                 19
                                                       19
                                                             19
                                                                  19
                                                                        19
                                                                              19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                          19
                                                                                                19
                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                                                19
                     9.4. Trade union membership as a percentage of employment in Britain (Thomas and Dimsdale 2017).




                     3,000,000

                     2,500,000

                     2,000,000

                     1,500,000

                     1,000,000

                       500,000

                               0
                                   13
                                        14
                                             15
                                                  16
                                                        17
                                                              18
                                                                    19




                                                                                                                            29
                                                                          20
                                                                                21
                                                                                      22
                                                                                            23
                                                                                                  24
                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                              26
                                                                                                                    27
                                                                                                                           28
                               19
                                     19
                                           19
                                                19
                                                      19
                                                            19
                                                                  19




                                                                                                                         19
                                                                        19
                                                                              19
                                                                                    19
                                                                                          19
                                                                                                19
                                                                                                      19
                                                                                                            19
                                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                                       19




                                                                    Italian workers involved
                                                                    British workers involved

                     9.5. Workers involved in strikes in Italy and Britain (Mitchell 1998, table B.3, “Industrial disputes”).




                     regarded as sounding the death knell of class struggle in Britain.
                     Among the casualties of this defeat were the many experiments for al-
                     ternative forms of economic organizations that were detailed in chap-
                     ters 3 and 4, from the building guilds to the plans for nationalization
                     and workers’ control in mining and other sectors.



                                                                                                                                279




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   279        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                                    6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     50%
                     45%
                     40%
                     35%
                     30%
                     25%
                     20%
                     15%
                     10%
                      5%
                      0%
                           13
                                 14
                                       15
                                             16
                                                   17
                                                         18
                                                               19
                                                                     20
                                                                           21
                                                                                 22
                                                                                       23
                                                                                             24
                                                                                                   25
                                                                                                         26
                                                                                                               27
                                                                                                                     28
                                                                                                                            29
                         19
                               19
                                     19
                                           19
                                                 19
                                                       19
                                                             19
                                                                   19
                                                                         19
                                                                               19
                                                                                     19
                                                                                           19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                       19
                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                   19
                                                                                                                         19
                                                         Strike intensity in Britain
                                                         Strike intensity in Italy

                     9.6. Strike intensity in Italy and Britain. The strike intensity is the number of striking workers expressed
                     as a percentage of the total industrial workforce. (Mitchell 1998, table B.3, and Thomas and Dimsdale 2017
                     [for Britain] and Lay et al. 1973 and Mitchell 1998 [for Italy].)




                        The arcs of strike occurrence and intensity in Italy are even starker
                     in their illustrations of how, through austerity, workers were disarmed
                     of their tools for social change. Workers’ demonstrations reached their
                     peak in 1920, with more than 2.3 million workers in agriculture and
                     industry on strike, a number that represented 12 percent of the entire
                     workforce and 48.5 percent of the labor force in capitalist-productive
                     sectors. Similar to its British equivalent, the great mobilization of
                     Italy’s two red years occurred at a time when the labor market was fa-
                     vorable to workers: unemployment rates were low. Even if the workers’
                     momentum began declining prior to Mussolini’s rise to power (and it
                     did: the economic downturn of 1921 increased the number of Italy’s
                     unemployed), it is indisputable that the effects of Fascist industrial
                     austerity—with the state actively intervening to suppress workforces
                     and wages—were devastating.
                        In 1923 the British ambassador to Italy, Sir Ronald William Graham,
                     reported back to his betters in the UK: “[T]he first year of the Fasci-
                     sta Government has shown, in comparison with the preceding twelve
                     months, a decrease in strikes of 75 per cent., in strikers of 90 per cent.,




                     280




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   280        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                                  6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                     austerity and its “successes”


                     and in working days lost of over 97 per cent., resulting in a gain for
                     the nation of 7,089,418 working days and of the continuous employ-
                     ment of 469,750 more men” (Italy Annual Report 1923, FO 371/9946,
                     fol. 246, 39).
                        The international domestic and liberal establishment celebrated the
                     newly found “industrial peace” described by Graham. His dispatch dis-
                     played a sense of contentment: “The firm rule of the government has
                     not only maintained order, but has given the innate good sense of the
                     country the opportunity to assert itself . . . it may be said that twelve
                     months of tranquility is a solid achievement which can justifiably be
                     regarded with satisfaction” (ibid., 38–39). By 1927 the Fascist Labour
                     Charter sanctioned the full authoritarian control of the Italian labor
                     force (see chapter 7). It is no coincidence then that, according to the
                     official statistics, strikers were almost extinct the following year (3,000
                     strikers overall in 1928).
                        Mussolini’s industrial austerity forced underpaid work on Italy’s
                     population through a form of political coercion that was unthink-
                     able in Britain: the Duce outlawed independent unions and slashed
                     wages by decree. However, intersections between the two examples are
                     abundant. In fact, the austere British government did not fear enact-
                     ing explicit, repressive labor laws against strikers to complement the
                     economic coercions imposed by the market. On the other hand, once
                     unemployment rose, the Italian state’s violent political attacks on dis-
                     senting workers were complemented by the economic coercion of im-
                     personal market forces. Notwithstanding the rapid economic growth
                     of the first years of the Fascist regime, in 1924 unemployment in Italy
                     was still higher than in 1920. Moreover, as we know from chapter 7,
                     the regime’s deflationary turn of 1926–1927 combined with further cuts
                     in public budgets represented another blow to the working classes.
                        The political defeats of organized labor in Britain and Italy imme-
                     diately translated into economic losses. As economic slumps go, these
                     would not have provoked panic from either country’s leaders: wage
                     compression was the central aim and consequence of each state’s aus-
                     terity agenda, and losses in other metrics were part of the process.



                                                                                                      281




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   281        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     In Italy there was an uninterrupted fall in real wages that lasted for
                     the whole interwar period, a unique trend among industrial countries
                     (Zamagni 1975, 543). In the 1920s alone, the drop in real daily wages in
                     Italy was almost 15 percent (see figure 9.7).
                         The success of Fascist austerity in suppressing wages is particularly
                     striking relative to the country’s gains in the immediate postwar pe-
                     riod. After the 1919 eight-hour-day law, in 1921 daily real wages were
                     50 percent higher than in 1918, and 35 percent higher than in 1913. There
                     was an even bigger jump in hourly real wages: in 1921 these wages had
                     almost doubled relative to prewar years (1913). But by 1923, when Mus-
                     solini informally abolished the working hour limit so that employers
                     could begin enforcing longer days of work, the statistical 4 percent
                     fall in daily real wages in just two years didn’t fully capture the more
                     marked fall in hourly pay (reaching a 13 percent decrease from 1922 to
                     1926). Workers were working more hours, and netting less pay.
                         While real wages reflect the purchasing power of workers, they don’t
                     do justice to the actual cuts in Italian paychecks, and with them the
                     lived experiences of the Italian people: especially the power dynamic
                     between capital and labor. Figure 9.7 maps real wages in Italy from be-
                     fore the war through the 1920s, seemingly telling a story of a predict-
                     able leap during the country’s red years followed by a plateau, give or
                     take, with the onset of austerity. Wage cuts during this period would
                     have been partially offset by deflation’s even more pronounced drop in
                     the prices of consumer goods (and hence would not have been reflected
                     in the metric of real wages). But between 1926 and 1928, Italian work-
                     ers were also forced to accept a drop of 26 percent in nominal daily
                     wages, thereby undercutting the consumer spending-power benefit of
                     deflation. The contrast here with respect to 1921, when Italian workers
                     achieved a 400 percent increase in nominal industrial daily wages with
                     respect to the prewar years, is mind-blowing.
                         The same set of factors applies to the British case. Given the eco-
                     nomic downturn and deflationary spiral that occurred in Britain, the
                     social implications of austerity—and its capacity to offset the impact of
                     workers’ mobilization after the war—are underrepresented in historical



                     282




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   282        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                     austerity and its “successes”


                     2.4                                                                                                          18

                     2.2                                                                                                          17
                                                                                                                                  16
                       2
                                                                                                                                  15
                     1.8
                                                                                                                                  14
                     1.6
                                                                                                                                  13
                     1.4
                                                                                                                                  12
                     1.2                                                                                                          11
                       1                                                                                                          10
                           13
                                14
                                     15
                                          16
                                                17
                                                      18
                                                           19
                                                                 20
                                                                       21
                                                                             22
                                                                                  23
                                                                                        24
                                                                                              25
                                                                                                   26
                                                                                                         27
                                                                                                               28
                                                                                                                     29
                                                                                                                          30
                       19
                             19
                                  19
                                        19
                                              19
                                                    19
                                                         19
                                                               19
                                                                     19
                                                                          19
                                                                                19
                                                                                      19
                                                                                            19
                                                                                                 19
                                                                                                       19
                                                                                                             19
                                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                                        19
                                                         Italy hourly real wages at 1938 lire
                                                         Italy daily real wages at 1938 lire

                     9.7. Real wages in Italy, expressed in 1938 lire (Zamagni 1975, tables 1 and 2). The vertical axis on the left
                     depicts the hourly real wages, the one on the right depicts daily real wages.




                     records of real wages. This fact has skewed the telling of this chapter in
                     Britain’s history.
                         Indeed, the drop in real wages starting in 1920 (see figure 9.8) cor-
                     responded to an even greater drop in the disposable income of Brit-
                     ish households. The concrete impact of austerity is apparent in how
                     quickly the trend in nominal wages was reversed: by 1920 nominal
                     weekly wages for British manual workers had soared 178 percent from
                     prewar levels (reaching £3.70, from £1.33 in 1913), but then the bulk of
                     such gains were lost within two years. By 1923, when monetary auster-
                     ity and the cuts of the Geddes Axe had taken their toll on expenditures
                     in public health and education, there was a 29 percent drop in average
                     weekly earnings, with wages stagnating around £2.61 for the rest of the
                     interwar years.
                         Once the population was deprived of key social benefits, many
                     workers lost their jobs, and even those who were able to keep their
                     posts were forced to work harder at lower wages. Here the second
                     axiom of austerity—consume less—found concrete realization: most
                     of the country had no choice but to consume less. The reduction in



                                                                                                                                 283




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   283        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                                     6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     300
                     275
                     250
                     225
                     200
                     175
                     150
                     125
                     100
                      75
                           13
                                14
                                     15
                                          16
                                                17
                                                      18
                                                            19
                                                                  20
                                                                       21
                                                                             22
                                                                                   23
                                                                                         24
                                                                                               25
                                                                                                    26
                                                                                                          27
                                                                                                                28
                                                                                                                      29
                                                                                                                           30
                       19
                             19
                                  19
                                        19
                                              19
                                                    19
                                                          19
                                                               19
                                                                     19
                                                                           19
                                                                                 19
                                                                                       19
                                                                                            19
                                                                                                  19
                                                                                                        19
                                                                                                              19
                                                                                                                    19
                                                                                                                         19
                     9.8. Real average weekly wages in Britain, expressed in 1913 pounds (Feinstein 1972, table 65, T140–41).




                     living standards for the majority of the public is illustrated by the mea-
                     sured consumption patterns around basic goods, which declined from
                     already precariously low levels. Statistics of the time reveal that British
                     and Italian citizens really did practice abstinence as their technocratic
                     overlords advised. In Britain, the increase in consumption that oc-
                     curred during the war years was lost in the years that followed, with no
                     rebound in consumption of basic popular goods (including alcohol and
                     tobacco) for the entirety of the 1920s. Mirroring a trend in Italy, British
                     housing expenditures—which grew by over a third from 1920 to 1930—
                     were the only exception to this larger trend. The difference, of course,
                     is that housing expenses were not a choice, but rather an obligation in
                     light of increased rents. More generally, British domestic consumption
                     demand dropped dramatically in the early years of austerity: from 1919
                     to 1923, there was a 40 percent drop that was never regained during the
                     interwar period (Sefton and Weale 1995).
                         The violence inherent in austerity was reflected in poverty rates of
                     the period. While Fascism “did not recognise (nor use) the category of
                     ‘poor’” (Preti and Venturoli 2000, 731), Vecchi (2017) calculates that
                     during the 1920s the percentage of the Italian population in absolute




                     284




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   284        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                     austerity and its “successes”


                     poverty increased to almost 30 percent—reversing a trend of decreas-
                     ing poverty that had been ongoing since 1861. In Britain, even the
                     country’s modest social inquiries produced alarming results (which
                     were skewed by their stringent criteria for calculating poverty). For
                     example, the Social Survey of Merseyside of 1928, carried out by Liver-
                     pool University, reported 16 percent of the population in poverty, only
                     2 percent of whom received any public assistance. Similarly, the New
                     Survey of London Life and Labour carried out in 1929–1930 found that
                     approximately 14 percent of the population in East London were “sub-
                     ject to conditions of privation which, if long continued, would deny
                     them all but the barest necessities and cut them off from access to many
                     of the incidental and cultural benefits of modern progress” (report in
                     Thane 1996, 157–58).
                         The devastating effects of austerity with respect to wages, unemploy-
                     ment, and living standards offer a strong case to question the legitimacy
                     of the endeavor. That it was never questioned reflects the fundamental
                     political motives that drove it: the subordination of the majority was
                     an essential prerequisite to safeguard the smooth function of capital
                     accumulation and especially to allow the ruling minority to reap the
                     benefits of a return to unadulterated capitalism.
                         Austerity promoted income concentration, filling the pockets of the
                     elites of British and Italian societies. In Italy from 1925 to 1930 there
                     was a noticeable growth in share of total income garnered by the few,
                     with the income of the top 1 percent growing by 9.6 percent, the top
                     0.1 by 29 percent, and the top 0.05 by 41 percent. Growth in income
                     concentration continued, even through the onset of the Great Depres-
                     sion in 1929 (Gabbuti 2020b, 274). Such is the rule in the recent history
                     of capitalism. Income data from the two most recent global recessions,
                     the 2008 financial crisis and the 2020 COVID-19 crisis, indicate how,
                     rather than being levelers of income distribution, economic crises only
                     serve to enrich the few and impoverish the many. This is ever more the
                     case when the crises are managed through policies that, under the guise
                     of stimulating the economy, actually perpetuate the old logic of auster-
                     ity: shift resources from the many to the few.



                                                                                                     285




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   285        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity




                     Conclusion

                     Austerity and its repression of domestic demand were undertaken to
                     defeat more than a simple economic shock. Indeed, the austerity de-
                     cade that followed World War I in Britain and Italy fully consolidated
                     the bourgeois social order.
                         The economic statistics collated in this chapter corroborate the ar-
                     gument that austerity worked (and still works) to restore the optimal
                     conditions for capital accumulation, primarily through higher unem-
                     ployment, lower wages, increased exploitation, and an increase in profit
                     share. Austerity produces the large-scale scarcity that aligns workers
                     with owners’ interests. In this sense, austerity’s “inflation-targeted”
                     policies might be better described as “rate-of-exploitation–targeted.”
                         As Michał Kalecki’s 1943 classic article “Political Aspects of Full Em-
                     ployment” pointedly theorized, a dosage of unemployment is impera-
                     tive to secure the balance of forces between capital and labor that per-
                     petuates social relations favorable to capital investment, in particular a
                     sufficient discipline of the workforce. Government spending programs
                     and monetary expansions instead challenge this precondition by fos-
                     tering a tighter labor market. As Kalecki writes, “Under a regime of
                     permanent full employment, the ‘sack’ would cease to play its role as a
                     disciplinary measure . . . [creating] political tension” (Kalecki 1943, 3).
                         The gains of austerity came primarily in the form of replacing po-
                     litical tension with a shallow notion of political stability, which in turn
                     enabled the resurgence of investment. The parallel and intertwined sto-
                     ries of the British and Italian cases reveal that, notwithstanding their
                     institutional differences, the technocrats in both countries were capable
                     of achieving the same results, as illustrated by the fall in wage shares
                     and consequent rise in profit shares in both countries. While the Brit-
                     ish Treasury officials mostly relied on the economic coercion of imper-
                     sonal market forces, the Italian professors benefited from the politi-
                     cal coercion of a Fascist dictatorship that guaranteed immediate wage
                     repression—by force where needed. In both countries, the restoration




                     286




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   286        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                     austerity and its “successes”


                     of capital accumulation came with greater income concentration at the
                     top and lower consumption everywhere else.
                        Of course, as many Keynesian and Marxian economists point out,
                     the repression of internal demand may be problematic for capital ac-
                     cumulation in the long run, as a lack of public and private demand
                     hinders the realization of profit, and thus investment. But if this book
                     highlights one thing, it’s that the perpetuation of austerity to this day
                     should not be reduced to a matter of irrationality or bad economic the-
                     ory from the experts who run economies. Austerity is a tool to main-
                     tain capitalist social relations of production—to maintain class. In an
                     austere capital order, popular protests may arise, but the protesters face
                     a political landscape that structurally disempowers them: it’s hard to
                     protest capitalist austerity when you have to depend on capitalism to
                     survive. As we shall explore in the concluding pages of this book, with
                     the resurgence of austerity in the late 1970s, surges in profit shares and
                     exploitation have been a constant in most countries of the world.




                                                                                                     287




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   287        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     chapter 10

                     Austerity Forever




                            [The Federal Reserve] needs to remember that their priority is the mac-
                            roeconomy. When I see them say that they won’t raise rates until diversity
                            groups’ unemployment rates are appropriate, I get nervous. . . . If they take
                            inflation seriously, monitor [it] closely and are prepared to cause pain, they
                            will be able to control inflation.

                            Lawrence Summers, interview for Bloomberg Wall Street Week, March 5, 2021




                     If one subscribes to the argument that austerity is a tool for manag-
                     ing a capitalist economy, as Keynesian economists did and do, then
                     one might believe that the continued deployment of austerity across
                     societies and economies is a form of political irrationality—a wrong
                     economic policy based on wrong economic theory that has never suc-
                     ceeded in achieving its stated ends. Take, for example, the events de-
                     picted in this book. Against its promise to stabilize the world economy,
                     the austerity project of the 1920s was a spectacular failure: its reduction
                     of aggregate demand—an effect its designers intended to introduce—is
                     cited by many as a cause of the Great Depression that began in 1929
                     and was only really resolved with the economic stimulus of, ironically,
                     another World War. The same assessment of failure can be drawn from
                     near countless economic downturns that have followed austerity revo-
                     lutions in Latin America and Europe over the past several decades.
                     Argentina’s complete economic meltdown in 2002 followed a decade of


                     288




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   288        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     austerity, one with all the industrial, fiscal, and monetary trappings of
                     the 1920s including large-scale privatization, exorbitant social cuts, and
                     an interest-rate jump from 5.8 percent in 1996 to 9.4 percent in 2001.
                     These outcomes seem to affirm the Keynesian view that austerity fails
                     in its purported objective to boost economic growth. But as this book
                     illustrates, austerity’s capacity to impose and reinforce class structure
                     is the true measure of its efficacy; it was a servant to, and indeed the
                     primary safeguard of, capital order. In this sense, it was never an irra-
                     tional calculation. This underlying rationale became evident based on
                     the timing of its emergence, a moment in which capitalism had been
                     challenged at its core. In the war’s aftermath alternatives to capitalism
                     were enticing citizens, not just in Eastern Europe but, as our book has
                     explored, also at the continent’s heart, in countries such as Britain and
                     Italy. New economic institutions threatened to destroy the very concept
                     of “wage-worker” and private capital. Austerity was a bulwark against
                     these nascent threats.
                         In the originating cases in Britain and Italy, as in more recent ex-
                     amples, an activist technocratic minority intervened in what they re-
                     garded as a world out of order. Under the guise of curtailing inflation
                     and balancing the budget—talking points that remain cornerstones of
                     the expert rhetoric today—economists worked then and now in service
                     of a more essential objective: the subordination of the majority to a
                     prevailing economic order.
                         In other words, when economists peddle austerity as a means to “fix
                     the economy” their goal is something more insidious. In describing the
                     austerity-induced economic downturn of 1921, the British economist
                     G. D. H. Cole (who did not favor austerity) captures the essence of
                     how austerity moves and shapes a society: “The big working-class of-
                     fensive had been successfully stalled off; and British capitalism, though
                     threatened with economic adversity, felt itself once more safely in the
                     saddle and well able to cope, both industrially and politically, with any
                     attempt that might still be made from the labour side to unseat it” (Cole
                     1958, 419).
                         Far from irrational, austerity was a wily counteroffensive that pro-
                     tected capitalism and its relations of production against the inroads


                                                                                                     289




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   289        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     of democracy. To be sure, austerity successfully disempowered the
                     majority.

                     The Austerity Trinity: Back in Action

                     The interwoven devastations of fiscal, monetary, and industrial auster-
                     ity smothered all forms of class-based activism in 1920s Britain and
                     Italy. In Britain, a handful of remaining strikes sought only to achieve
                     sectional industrial interests, not the full-blown recasting of the orga-
                     nization of production; in Italy strikes disappeared altogether. Alberto
                     De Stefani expressed pride in this rapid calming, remarking in 1926 that
                     “during the last four years, the Fascist regime has balanced the budget,
                     restored discipline in the labour world, and faced, notwithstanding the
                     sacrifices it entailed, the settlement of war debts” (“Italian Monetary
                     Policy,” The Times, October 22, 1926, 17).
                        This successful precedent made austerity a popular and recurring
                     toolkit for economies around the globe. This was especially the case
                     starting in the late 1970s, when austerity again came into fashion in the
                     majority of capitalist countries, including Britain and Italy.
                        A full-blown exploration (or autopsy) of this later period—especially
                     one that does justice to the many cases of IMF-backed structural re-
                     forms in the global South—would require a book of its own. However,
                     even a superficial study of the more high-profile cases reveals the per-
                     sistence of the austerity logic—and the tendency of history to repeat.
                        State intervention and public welfare were back in vogue after World
                     War II. In the war’s aftermath, both British and Italian organized la-
                     bor strengthened and bolstered their political sway. The inflationary
                     pressures of the mid-1970s only amplified workers’ voices; union ranks
                     grew, strikes mounted, and so did calls to break away from the presid-
                     ing capital order.
                        Wages and labor rights continued to flourish throughout the decade.
                     In Italy, the years 1970–1977 saw real wages rise at an annual average of
                     about 7 percent (Levrero and Stirati 2004, 2), with the wage share in-
                     creasing and reaching a high of 70 percent in 1977. Similar trends were
                     on display in Britain, where workers’ activism in the postwar decades


                     290




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   290        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     brought the national wage share as high as 79 percent in 1975. Dur-
                     ing the country’s so-called winter of discontent—from October 1978 to
                     February 1979—strikes occurred on a scale unseen since the General
                     Strike of 1926. In 1979 alone, 4 million people were withholding labor, a
                     figure equaling the combined number of strikers during 1919 and 1920.
                        But 1979 also saw the rise of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who
                     famously dismissed workers as “idle, deceitful, inferior, and bloody-
                     minded” and rejected talk of class in favor of a focus on “personal re-
                     sponsibility.” Thatcher inaugurated austerity’s comeback in Britain, this
                     time under the counsel of a team of experts that included members of
                     the famed Mont Pelerin Society—an intellectual community regarded
                     by many as the originators of neoliberalism, organized around a com-
                     mitment to defend the “central values of civilization.”
                        Nigel Lawson, Thatcher’s chancellor of the exchequer from 1983 to
                     1989, spoke in terms similar to his 1920s predecessors, extolling virtues
                     like “firm monetary discipline, buttressed by a prudent fiscal stance”
                     (HC Deb 15 March 1988, vol. 129, cc 995). In his 1988 budget speech,
                     Lawson enthusiastically recounted the effects of his major business
                     taxation reform of 1984: “[It] has given us one of the lowest corpora-
                     tion tax rates in the world [35 percent]. This has encouraged overseas
                     companies to invest in Britain” (ibid., cc 999). On that same occasion
                     he also announced a further extension of regressive taxation, including
                     an abolition of capital duties and a substantial increase in consumption
                     duties, including those on cereals, cigarettes and hand-rolling tobacco,
                     beer, cider, wine, and spirits—policies, he said, that would tax “the bad
                     habits” of the working public. Meanwhile, British industrial austerity
                     proliferated. Between 1982 and 1986, experts at the Treasury oversaw
                     more than 22 privatizations of large public-sector companies, includ-
                     ing the car maker Jaguar, British Telecommunication, and British Gas;
                     public utilities such as water and electricity were also put up for sale.
                     In 1988 Lawson bragged, “[s]ince 1979 we have privatised getting on
                     for 40 per cent of the state-owned sector of industry,” before adding,
                     “privatisation benefits the company, its employees and the economy as
                     a whole” (HC Deb 11 February 1988, vol. 127, cc 487). New laws also
                     allowed employers to sack strikers and reduce dismissal compensa-


                                                                                                      291




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   291        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     tion. They forbade workers to strike in support of others and threat-
                     ened to seize union assets in cases of the perpetuation of “unlawful”
                     strikes. The first to face a blow were the steelworkers in 1980, who lost
                     a thirteen-week strike battle and paid the price with thousands of jobs.
                     Then in March 1985 came the emblematic capitulation of the miners
                     after a titanic year-long strike. The collapse of the most powerful group
                     of workers in the country changed the face of British labor relations. If,
                     in 1979, half of all British workers were trade unionists and 4.6 million
                     people participated in strikes, by 1998 union members were reduced
                     to less than a third of the workforce, and only 93,000 still partook
                     in strikes. From 1975 to 1996, rates of economic exploitation almost
                     doubled. In those same years the profit rate grew from 21 percent to
                     32 percent.
                        Following the advances of labor in Italy during the 1970s, austerity
                     was reintroduced and was predictably successful in quieting and disci-
                     plining the majority. It began with the first adjustments to adhere to the
                     European Monetary System (EMS) in 1979, and from then was vastly
                     strengthened with Italy’s commitment to adhere to the 1992 Maastricht
                     Treaty—the founding document of the European Union, steeped in the
                     economic principles of austerity. With the Maastricht Treaty, the EU’s
                     twelve member states assumed permanent austere obligations as a mat-
                     ter of “multilateral surveillance.”
                        Among the men who guided Italy’s effort to meet the conditions for
                     EU membership was Mario Draghi, who headed the Italian delegation
                     of the intergovernmental conference that gave shape to the Maastricht
                     Treaty. Since then, Draghi has been at the forefront of Italian tech-
                     nocratic power. He served as director general of the Italian Treasury
                     (1991–2001), governor of Banca d’Italia (2005–2011), and president of
                     the European Central Bank (2011–2019). On February 5, 2021, Draghi
                     was sworn in as Italian prime minister—appointed not via elections,
                     but via direct nomination from the Italian president of the Republic.
                        Draghi continued a trend of non-elected technocratic prime minis-
                     ters in post-Maastricht Italy, led by senior officials of the Banca d’Italia
                     Carlo Azeglio Ciampi (1993–1994) and Lamberto Dini (1995–1996). To-
                     gether these men implemented austerity reforms that targeted the Ital-


                     292




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   292        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     ian welfare state and tilted the relationship of power to favor capital over
                     labor. While the Italian government drastically reduced expenditure for
                     social interventions, the wage share steadily declined beginning in 1983
                     (when it was 70 percent of GDP), reaching a low of 61 percent in 2001.
                         The Italians also introduced industrial austerity measures to pro-
                     mote greater wage and price “flexibility.” These efforts culminated in
                     the abolition in 1992 of the scala mobile (the Italian system of wage
                     indexation introduced in 1975, and an emblematic victory for labor; see
                     chapter 9, note 5). The state also initiated a groundbreaking privatiza-
                     tion campaign to restore the country’s budgets, “increase efficiency,”
                     and boost its standing as an EU member. Most national banks and pub-
                     lic enterprises, including IRI (the Institute for Industrial Reconstruc-
                     tion), ENI (petroleum and natural gas), and ENEL (gas and electricity),
                     were sold off. The establishment of the Euro as Italy’s currency, which
                     in effect eliminated the country’s capacity to regulate its own currency,
                     has increased the country’s tendency toward fiscal and industrial aus-
                     terity measures to meet its economic ends. As with the gold standard
                     during the interwar years, this loss of monetary sovereignty reinforced
                     the necessity to shape people’s behaviors through other means and ac-
                     cording to an austere political order.
                         All of this came to a head in June 2011, when the Italian people
                     turned out in record numbers to vote on a referendum to halt the
                     privatization of all public utilities, including water, with the objective
                     of transforming them into common goods. It had been more than fifty
                     years since the country had successfully utilized its constitutional in-
                     strument of direct democracy in this way. Many read the episode as a
                     significant manifestation of popular agency, or perhaps more radically
                     a step toward a modified organizing of Italian social life. Two months
                     later, and as had been the case in Italy for nearly a century, the austerity
                     reflex kicked in.
                         On August 5, 2011, at the peak of the debt-market crisis, Italian
                     prime minister Silvio Berlusconi received a highly confidential letter
                     signed by the president of the European Central Bank, Jean-Claude
                     Trichet, and his designated successor, Mario Draghi. The letter de-
                     clared “the gravity” of the hour, and called for “necessary” and “bold”


                                                                                                     293




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   293        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     action—“essential to restore the confidence of investors” (see letter in Il
                     corriere della sera, August 5, 2011). The ECB had leverage on its side: if
                     Italy softened on its austerity reforms, then the central bank would stop
                     buying back Italian bonds. The bank’s demands were clear: Italy was to
                     display harsh fiscal rigor (to achieve a public deficit equal to 1 percent
                     of the GDP as early as 2012) and, the letter suggested, undertake con-
                     stitutional reform that would “make budget rules more stringent.” The
                     letter called for “privatization on a large scale” of local public services,
                     including public utilities and water (the very things the people had just
                     opposed). It also demanded an overhaul of restrictive rules on hiring,
                     firing, and wage bargaining, and required Italy to reduce the cost of its
                     public employees by curbing wages “if necessary.”
                         Whereas Mussolini’s government succeeded in 1922 at implement-
                     ing the international austerity agenda largely conceived by foreign
                     interests, Berlusconi was less successful at achieving similar goals in
                     2011. The pressures from the ECB, combined with the financial mar-
                     kets’ speculation on Italian bonds, forced him to resign that Novem-
                     ber. He was succeeded as prime minister—though again, not through
                     election—by Bocconi University economist Mario Monti, who sought
                     “substantial restructuring of the roots of [Italy’s] economy in favor
                     of productivity and competitiveness.” Monti’s actions bring to mind
                     those of De Stefani, who in 1922 was willing to sacrifice anyone—
                     especially the weaker members of society—to gain financial credibility
                     abroad. While De Stefani invoked the “conscious renunciation of the
                     rights gained by the crippled, the invalids, the soldiers,” so, in similar
                     fashion, did Monti cut the funds of those suffering from amyotrophic
                     lateral sclerosis (ALS). When asked about the social impact of this re-
                     form, his answer was simple: it was nothing but the consequence of
                     resource constraints due to the immoral behavior of the Italian citi-
                     zens who, up to that moment, “had protected their privileges” [tutleato
                     i propri privilegi] and “acted cunningly” [furbizia]. The refrain sounds
                     familiar: crises are attributed to people living beyond their means and
                     refusing to work productively.
                         Ensuing governments, including those led by the Italian Democratic
                     Party (PD), pressed on with austerity. For example, Matteo Renzi’s Jobs


                     294




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   294        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     Act of 2014 reversed the historic rights of the 1970 Statute of the Work-
                     ers, making it legal to fire workers at any time for “economic reasons.”
                     As precarious forms of work and underemployment boomed, real
                     wages plummeted by 4.3 percent between 2010 and 2017. The impact
                     of these austerity years on the standard of living of the Italian popula-
                     tion is visible in the official data on real per capita consumption, which
                     fell rapidly between 2011 and 2014—a 7 percent drop.
                         Italian austerity was far from an externality imposed by the eco-
                     nomic troika (ECB, European Commission, and IMF). Within Italy,
                     the intellectual hold of the country’s austere economists—the so-called
                     “Bocconi boys”—continues to dominate debates around politics and
                     economy, both domestic and international. That Bocconi University
                     proudly maintains the tradition of Luigi Einaudi, who taught public
                     finance there from 1902 to 1925, is no small part of this. Like their pre-
                     decessors in the 1920s, Italian economists such as Alberto Alesina, Sil-
                     via Ardagna, Carlo Favero, Francesco Giavazzi, and Guido Tabellini
                     have served as prominent advisors to the IMF, the World Bank, and the
                     ECB, entrenching a core belief that economic growth requires a public
                     majority to accept working harder for lower wages.

                     Disempowering “Apolitical” Theory

                     The economic experts at the Brussels and Genoa conferences would
                     not have envisioned themselves as subordinating the will of the major-
                     ity as such. Rather, in the dissonance that is common among econo-
                     mists, they would have seen their reforms as grounded in an elevated
                     understanding of how the world works. These fathers of today’s main-
                     stream economics presented austerity policies as the outcome of theory
                     that was objective and neutral, a worldview that transcended class rela-
                     tions. Their stated urge to “tame men,” in turn, was not domination,
                     but rather a necessity for an organized society—something above mere
                     politics or class. Such is the manner of depoliticization: it served (and
                     still serves) to conceal economic coercion under the guise of build-
                     ing consensus—in this case, as elsewhere, for the disempowerment
                     of the many.


                                                                                                     295




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   295        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                         However, a theory that masquerades as being above class is also
                     a theory that fails to account for class in its theoretical framework.
                     That austerity came to exist in the shadow of the Great War—a “class-
                     agnostic” economic framework deployed for a moment of unprec-
                     edented class conflict—demonstrated the imperiousness, and deniabil-
                     ity, of its originators.
                         Economists re-naturalized capital as a social relation by walling off
                     its alternatives. While L’Ordine nuovo theorized labor as the source of
                     value for employers and criticized exploitation as a structural trap for
                     workers, economists portrayed these relationships as equal exchanges
                     among equal individuals—a road to prosperity for all those who dem-
                     onstrated a rational capacity to optimize. Economists modeled the
                     market society as one in which all people, if sufficiently rational and
                     virtuous, could potentially thrive. This seemingly emancipatory insight
                     was actually among the most classist: social hierarchies were reflections
                     of individual merit, meaning that those who weren’t at the top didn’t
                     deserve to be. The saver-entrepreneurs’ profits were the products of
                     their virtuous behavior, the same behaviors that signed workers’ pay-
                     checks and propelled the economy.
                         No physical weapon could have been as powerful as this theoreti-
                     cal framework in removing agency from workers and justifying pri-
                     vate profit. The message is one that today we have all internalized: if
                     enough effort is exercised, we can elevate ourselves to become part of
                     the saving-and-investing class. Those who fail to do so can blame only
                     themselves.
                         Current economic models continue to reinforce our passive accep-
                     tance of this capital order. In the example of the “Bocconi boys,” the set
                     of influentially austere Italian economists whose profiles were ascen-
                     dent starting in the late 1970s, their theories reflect an assumption that
                     savers-investors hold the key to economic prosperity. It remains the
                     through line in their theories.
                         It follows logically that the purpose of economic policy is to shift
                     resources from the majority to an economic minority. Cuts in social
                     spending, Alberto Alesina wrote, “signal that tax rates won’t have to rise
                     in the future, thus spur investors to be ‘more active’” (Alesina 2012).


                     296




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   296        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     Specifically, to boost profit expectations, governments have incentives
                     “to cut the most politically sensitive components of the budget: [social]
                     transfers and government wages and employment” (Alesina and Perotti
                     1995, 12, my italics). The overall message here is explicit: cuts in social
                     spending and labor costs not only boost the profits of the select few;
                     they also serve as a control over the majority, who otherwise would
                     slack off (the same kind of slacking that keeps them from being savers
                     and investors).
                         The interconnection between fiscal and industrial austerity (what
                     economists call supply-side reforms, including privatization and labor-
                     market deregulation) assures the maximum disciplinary effects of
                     market forces. Here again Alesina and colleagues offer a playbook for
                     economic control: “[A] decrease in government employment reduces
                     the probability of finding a job if not employed in the private sector,
                     and a decrease in government wages decreases the worker’s income if
                     employed in the public sector.” In both cases, they note, “the wage de-
                     manded by the union for private sector workers decreases, increasing
                     profits, investment, and competitiveness” (Alesina and Ardagna 2010,
                     5). The experts are clear: in the name of the good of the whole, “wage
                     moderation”; “no more Christmas-related extra payments” (Alesina
                     and de Rugy 2013, 15); and a higher retirement age were all desirable
                     policies. As Alesina once mused, “If the French think that they can keep
                     retiring at 60, they’re kidding themselves” (Alesina 2012).
                         Unlike austerity’s early architects, whose theories were framed as
                     operating on a level above class, these latter-day austerity hawks dem-
                     onstrate awareness of how their policy prescriptions affect the working
                     class. “Fiscal adjustment may increase income inequality,” wrote Ale-
                     sina and Roberto Perotti in 1995, noting also that “the share of profits
                     in the business sector increases” and that the “wage share falls during
                     the adjustment and remains lower after, relative to before” (Alesina and
                     Perotti 1995, 21). These class effects correspond to the most efficient
                     conditions for capital order.
                         Buried in the technical jargon and technocratic publishing outlets
                     where these policy statements are made, Alesina and his colleagues
                     demonstrate the same distrust for the working classes that Luigi


                                                                                                     297




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   297        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     Einaudi and Maffeo Pantaleoni displayed after the Great War. In one
                     scientific paper written for the International Monetary Fund, Alesina
                     denounces the “culture of dependency” of people in the south of Italy,
                     a trait he argues is enabled by expansionary policies that further dis-
                     courage entrepreneurship: “the less individuals are prepared to ‘face
                     the market,’ the more they prefer public jobs. Furthermore, it generates
                     a powerful constituency of public employees and their unions who are
                     typically opposed to market-oriented policies and more flexibility in
                     the labor market” (Danninger, Alesina, and Rostagno 1999, 4).
                        Austerity has been animated since its beginnings by anxiety about
                     the wills and actions of “entitled” citizens. In the words of its bard,
                     Alesina, austerity arms experts and leaders with the tools to “protect”
                     economic decisions from people’s “unavoidable political pressures to
                     pursue short run expansionary policies” (Alesina and Grilli 1991, 14).

                     Anti-Democracy and Authoritarianism

                     As Pantaleoni put it bluntly in 1920, economic policy making could not
                     be “at once popular and exact.” The problem of political democracy was
                     that people did not understand what was in their best interests; they
                     had to be kept away from economic decisions for their own good. To-
                     day’s austerity politics remain grounded in a drive to shield economic
                     governance from popular opinion—to keep the economy from get-
                     ting political.
                         In Italy, where political successions already proceed in anti-
                     democratic ways, the anti-democratic ideas of 1920s technocrats con-
                     tinue to be reinvented with new sophistication. As part of an ongo-
                     ing and tireless academic effort that began in the early 1980s and is
                     still under way, austerity-hawk economists have advanced a notion
                     that electoral democracies (especially those with proportional repre-
                     sentation) have an intrinsic tendency toward accumulating debt and
                     are therefore economically inefficient. In the words of one noteworthy
                     paper, “[l]ack of fiscal discipline is almost exclusively found in coun-
                     tries governed by representational democracies” (Grilli et al. 1991, 359).
                     These sentiments evoke Pantaleoni’s at the 1920 Brussels conference:


                     298




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   298        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     “where Socialism is strong, where democracy is strong, public finance
                     will go the wrong way” (Brussels 1920, vol. 4, 109).
                         While the Italian professors under Fascism found immunity from
                     democratic liability in an authoritarian government that allowed them
                     to directly implement their models, the British version of technocracy
                     centered on a campaign for economic management in the hands of in-
                     dependent central banks—a campaign that was then exported all over
                     the globe. Blackett’s efforts with the Indian Central Bank were matched
                     by Niemeyer’s similar efforts in Eastern Europe, Australia, Brazil,
                     and Argentina.
                         The universal link between austerity and political repression that
                     went unconcealed under Fascism but was buried in policies elsewhere
                     reveals how the economic treatment of Italian citizens was not so dif-
                     ferent from the one that the British experts envisioned for their own
                     people. Even if different in implementation, the Italian and the Brit-
                     ish technocrats shared a common purpose: imposing sacrifice on the
                     majority of the public. Both did so without any real rebuke.
                         Once people were removed from the decision-making process, the
                     models of pure economics could reassert the primacy of the market,
                     letting it function as it should—i.e., unabated and free from worker de-
                     mands. In their view, economic freedom was more important than po-
                     litical freedom—especially the political freedom to manage the econ-
                     omy democratically. In fact, these economists understood economic
                     freedom not in the Gramscian sense, where economic freedom meant
                     emancipating the majority from exploitation (as detailed in chapter 4),
                     but rather as the protection of the saving-and-investing minority and
                     the unfettered free market in which this minority operated. In other
                     words, economic freedom meant the operation of capital accumula-
                     tion, which required the economic coercion inherent to wage relations
                     and thus the unfreedom of the popular classes. The technocrats’ con-
                     ception of economic freedom was indeed incompatible with any em-
                     powerment of the majority.
                         The British Treasury experts could forgo physical violence because
                     they used interest rates and the budget to knock workers out of their
                     jobs and social securities. Even in settings of elite liberal capitalism,


                                                                                                     299




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   299        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     experts are still protective of the power to tweak the dials of macroeco-
                     nomic management, and they develop similar strategies to hide them
                     from popular view. The insulation of central bank independence is a
                     trope of the austerity project to this day; a vast literature almost unani-
                     mously praises the “social desirability” of excluding citizens from mon-
                     etary decisions, favoring instead “an agent whose preferences are more
                     inflation averse than are society’s preferences” (Alesina and Summers
                     1993, 151).
                         The constitution of the European Central Bank (ECB), which since
                     1999 has served as the sole issuing institution of all European member
                     states, represented a huge achievement for the technocratic austerity
                     set. The ECB operates with a mandate and structure that draws on the
                     Hawtreyan template of the 1920s. Since the Maastricht Treaty, the ECB
                     retains formal “independence from elected officials,” so as to operate
                     “without prejudice” in favor of price stability—its primary mandate.
                     This constitution also forbids European council representatives from
                     being a part of the ECB’s Council (Article 15.1, in Alesina and Grilli
                     1991, 13). It also “explicitly forbids” the ECB board to “receive any in-
                     struction from either community or national political institutions”
                     (ibid., Article 7). Political independence is accompanied by economic
                     independence: the ECB has no obligation to finance the member na-
                     tions’ public deficits, thus heavily restricting expansionary fiscal policy
                     within its states.
                         The EU era has also given austerity hawks a window to advance in-
                     stitutional reforms that explicitly strike at the foundations of demo-
                     cratic principles—political guardrails that, especially in Italy, were for-
                     malized to mark a distance from the country’s Fascist past. Similar to
                     Fascist economists in the early 1920s, these contemporary figures advo-
                     cate for electoral reforms to diminish proportional representation (and
                     thus favor stronger governments) and to rewrite countries’ constitu-
                     tions to include an obligation to a balanced budget. Italy implemented
                     both policies in the 2010s.
                         In times of greater popular contestation against capital order, the
                     only route to accomplish these austerity ends was the endorsement of
                     authoritarianism. The script of austere Fascist Italy was replayed under


                     300




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   300        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     Augusto Pinochet’s military dictatorship in Chile (1973–1990), which
                     was ushered in by the bombardment of the Palacio de la Moneda on
                     September 11, 1973, to remove Salvador Allende, the socialist president
                     who was then the leader of a popular struggle for social redistribution
                     and resocialization of large sectors of the economy. The coup opened
                     the doors for the “Chicago Boys”—a select group of Chilean economists
                     trained at the University of Chicago under neoclassical gurus Milton
                     Friedman and Arnold Harberger—to implement their Ladrillo: a brick-
                     like document outlining a fierce austerity plan that successfully smoth-
                     ered the Chilean alternative to capitalism. Chile’s Museum of Memory
                     and Human Rights, opened in 2010 in Santiago, commemorates the
                     human costs of a regime enabled in order to enact Chilean austerity:
                     more than 40,000 people died, disappeared, or suffered repression dur-
                     ing Pinochet’s dictatorship. When asked about these incidents, Chilean
                     economist Rolf Lüders, himself a Chicago boy and a former minister
                     of finance under Pinochet, lucidly pointed to the connection between
                     austerity and political coercion: “And if you ask me if you justify the
                     human rights violations? No, I find them awful. But it seems to me
                     that it would not have been possible to make the change that was made
                     in Chile without an authoritarian regime” (in the 2015 documentary,
                     Chicago Boys). The “change” he refers to brought about the usual pro-
                     ceedings of austerity: a surge of unemployment (32 percent in 1983),
                     accompanied by a rise in exploitation, which from 1971 to 1985 almost
                     doubled (from 0.62 to 1.28). In those years the share of corporate prof-
                     its rose from 31.4 percent to 42.4 percent. The proportion of wages
                     decreased by 17.6 percent while the proportion of profits increased by
                     10 percent. The poverty rate increased from 20 percent to 44 percent.
                         The mingling of authoritarianism, economic expertise, and auster-
                     ity is a recurring trend in modern history. It is seen in the case of the
                     Berkeley-trained economists working under Suharto’s dictatorship
                     in Indonesia (1967–1998), as well as the dramatic story of the asser-
                     tion of capital order in Russia after the dissolution of the USSR. In that
                     instance, the government of Boris Yeltsin effectively declared war on
                     Russian legislators who opposed the IMF-backed austerity agenda that
                     Yeltsin courted to stabilize the Russian economy. The peak of Yeltsin’s


                                                                                                      301




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   301        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     assault against democracy came in October 1993, when the president
                     called in tanks, helicopters, and 5,000 soldiers to rain fire on the Rus-
                     sian Parliament. The attack killed more than 500 people and left many
                     more wounded. Once the ashes settled, Russia was under unchecked
                     dictatorial rule: Yeltsin dissolved the “recalcitrant” Parliament, sus-
                     pended the constitution, disbanded the constitutional court, shut down
                     newspapers, and jailed his political opposition.
                         Much as it did with Mussolini’s dictatorship in the 1920s, the Econo-
                     mist had no qualms in justifying Yeltsin’s strongman actions as the only
                     path that could guarantee capital order: “Mr. Yeltsin had to choose be-
                     tween smashing his rival with force or seeing himself, his government
                     and any prospect of reform destroyed. . . . Mr. Yeltsin’s opposition was a
                     bizarre coalition of extremists of every kind, more than a few of whom,
                     to western eyes, seem downright crazy. . . . The threat, in the end,
                     was extreme—and so, necessarily, was the response.” The article con-
                     cluded, “These gains—the restoration of Mr. Yeltsin’s power to govern
                     and renewed progress in economic reform—are great indeed.” In the
                     months that followed, as the Economist doted on the rapid privatization
                     of Russian industries, data from the World Bank showed that unem-
                     ployment had reached double digits. If, in 1987–1988, 2 percent of the
                     Russian people lived in poverty (i.e., survived on less than $4 a day), by
                     1993–1995 the number reached 50 percent: in just seven years half the
                     Russian population became destitute. In the same period, non-wage
                     income rose from 5 percent to 23 percent of GDP.
                         These immediate, devastating effects of austerity were no surprise.
                     They were the scripted results of the “economists’ consensus,” as Law-
                     rence Summers defined it in 1994 while he served as a Treasury of-
                     ficial during Bill Clinton’s administration. Summers was adamant
                     that, for Russia, “the three ‘-ations’—privatization, stabilization, and
                     liberalization—must all be completed as soon as possible. Maintain-
                     ing the momentum of reform is a crucial political problem.” As a
                     foreign interest, the United States was keen to solve this crucial prob-
                     lem: President Clinton passed billions in aid to Yeltsin, and USAID
                     lavishly funded the Harvard Institute for International Development,




                     302




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   302        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     directed by the economist Jeffrey Sachs, to advise Yeltsin’s austerity
                     project.
                         In her essay “What Is Authority?” the twentieth-century politi-
                     cal theorist Hannah Arendt wrote: “The search for the best form of
                     government reveals itself to be the search for the best government for
                     philosophers”—the people doing the search—“which turns out to be
                     the governments in which philosophers have become the rulers of the
                     city” (Arendt 1961, 114). For austere economic experts imposing their
                     wills on transitional economies since the 1920s, the process is very
                     much the same: at the very moment their supposedly pure knowledge
                     of transcendent economic ideas is applied to governing the real world,
                     it quickly becomes clear that economic ideas are not really transcen-
                     dent after all. While these economists may refute the suggestion of an
                     agenda in these moments, their keenly political interventions reveal
                     them, no matter how they may want the story to be told, as inescapably
                     party to a struggle to preserve capital order—seemingly the only form
                     of social order they can conceive of.
                         The austerity impulse is present even where it appears otherwise. So
                     far in the twenty-first century, two financial crises have been met with
                     economic responses labeled “Keynesian” for their decisions to spend
                     rather than cut. But some old habits don’t die. After 2008, governments
                     took care to save financial institutions first, thereby draining resources
                     from the public in the years that followed. The rationale for such activi-
                     ties perfectly matched those that we have encountered in this book: a
                     shift of resources from the many to the few.
                         The same austerity pattern emerged during the response to COVID-
                     19. Public resources were lavishly spent to fund financial institutions and
                     large-scale corporations, while the public majority was left with meager
                     crumbs. In the US, the CARES Act of April 2020 allocated $790 billion
                     as loans and guarantees to large businesses and tax breaks—an unprec-
                     edented amount. Meanwhile the funds allocated for the 160 million
                     American households that qualified for direct payments was less than a
                     third of that. Amid mounting unemployment—the global shortfall in
                     employment increased by 144 million jobs in 2020—downward pres-




                                                                                                     303




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   303        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     the meaning of austerity


                     sure on wages grows and the prospects for private profits are revived.
                     Inequality reached unprecedented new highs during the pandemic,
                     and in June 2021 the International Labour Organization reported that
                     “relative to 2019, an estimated additional 108 million workers [glob-
                     ally] are now extremely or moderately poor, meaning that they and
                     their family members are having to live on less than US$3.20 per day
                     in purchasing power parity terms.” An analysis from the Institute for
                     Policy Studies around the same time showed that between March 2020
                     and March 2021 the world’s 2,365 billionaires enjoyed a $4 trillion boost
                     to their wealth, increasing their fortunes by 54 percent. As austerity
                     takes more sophisticated forms, it remains a boon for a predictable few.
                         Soaring public deficits that have mounted due to COVID will call
                     for harsher austerity in the near future. In February 2021, the Harvard
                     economist Summers, speaking at Princeton University about the in-
                     flationary risks of the Biden administration’s proposal to issue a cash
                     stimulus to the American public, told the audience “there is no compel-
                     ling economic case for a stimulus” (interview for Bloomberg Wall Street
                     Week, March 5, 2021, min. 55). If governments were to provide house-
                     holds with “more than what they need,” those households’ spending
                     would throw off the delicate stasis of the economy: “the spending pro-
                     pensity out of [middle-class households] would be far greater than the
                     spending propensity economists usually estimate from wealth which is
                     driven by fluctuations in the stock market.” Spending by people who
                     shouldn’t spend, Summers warns, would cause inflationary harm to the
                     economy of the wealthy.
                         A century after Ralph Hawtrey, Summers’s fears and predictions
                     match the Hawtreyan scoldings that undergird much of this book’s ar-
                     guments. These ideas are neither wrong nor irrational, per se. They are
                     merely the expression of a very clear worldview, one whose global pri-
                     macy is maintained by a century-long project in economic austerity. It
                     is grounded firmly in the most dismal parts of the dismal science, those
                     that keep people entrenched within a status quo.
                         This book has detailed a set of influential economic patterns that
                     are pervasive across the globe and that shape our daily lives. Contrary
                     to what the proponents of austerity would have us think, however, the


                     304




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   304        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   austerity forever


                     socioeconomic system we live in is not inevitable, nor is it to be grudg-
                     ingly accepted as the only way forward. Austerity is a political project
                     arising out of the need to preserve capitalist class relations of domina-
                     tion. It is the outcome of collective action to foreclose any alternatives
                     to capitalism. It can thus be subverted through collective counterac-
                     tion. The study of its logic and purpose is a first step in that direction.




                                                                                                     305




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   305        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   306        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Afterword




                     By telling the story of post–World War I reconstruction through a new
                     lens of austerity, The Capital Order transcends the canonical disciplin-
                     ary boundaries between political economy, economic history, and his-
                     tory of economic thought, as well as labor and social history. If these
                     efforts are successful, then the result would expand, critique, and some-
                     times depart from entrenched scholarly conversations. In addition to
                     its central contribution of offering an alternative understanding and
                     approach to austerity, this book requires a rethinking of the relation-
                     ship between Keynesianism and neoliberalism; the history of neoliber-
                     alism; the history of the interwar period; and especially the history and
                     nature of Italian Fascism.
                         In the first place, the lens of austerity is a powerful tool by which to
                     reassess the history of political economy in the twentieth and twenty-
                     first centuries. It provides fertile grounds to begin a reappraisal of the all
                     too familiar narrative of the century-long confrontation between two
                     opposing economic traditions: the Neoliberal tradition and the Keynes-
                     ian tradition. If we focus on austerity’s primary objective—that is, the
                     foreclosure of alternatives to capitalism through depoliticization—
                     commonalities emerge.
                         These commonalities can be traced back to Keynes himself, who,
                     as we know, was a prominent interlocutor of the experts at the British
                     Treasury and whose insights on effective demand were heavily influ-


                                                                                                     307




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   307        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     afterword


                     enced by Ralph Hawtrey. We’ve seen how, after the Great War, Keynes
                     shared with his fellow austere British experts a real terror of the col-
                     lapse of the capital order. The book In the Long Run We Are All Dead
                     (Mann 2017) articulates how this “existential” anxiety is a constant of
                     contemporary Keynesianism, given that no other social order outside
                     of capitalism is really conceivable.
                        Certainly, Keynes did break with the Treasury’s orthodoxy on the
                     grounds of his rejection of Say’s law. Indeed, the downturn of the
                     1930s—when the world financial system was in collapse and unemploy-
                     ment was rampant in most of the industrial countries—deeply affected
                     his thinking, to the point that he describes the General Theory as the
                     outcome of “a long struggle of escape from habitual modes of thought
                     and expression” (Keynes 1964, viii). He theorized the need for state
                     intervention to boost effective demand, boost macroeconomic stability,
                     and thus secure adequate investment of entrepreneurs’ available private
                     savings. However, Keynes never strayed far from the deepest kernels
                     of the austerity project.
                        Keynes endorsed the most fundamental technocratic impulses. Like
                     his austere colleagues, Keynes’s economic theory expelled the notion of
                     class conflict and concealed class repression. By disregarding the labor
                     theory of value and the importance of exploitation to explain capital
                     accumulation, Keynes’s model accepts the principle that the engine of
                     the economic machine is the entrepreneur and his economic invest-
                     ments, the key to the prosperity of all. In the General Theory deficient
                     effective demand is ultimately due to a lack of investment on the part of
                     entrepreneurs. It follows that the objective of macroeconomic manage-
                     ment is to create an optimal investment environment, i.e., “a political
                     and social atmosphere that is congenial to the average businessman”
                     (Keynes 1964, 162). Unlike many of the radical reconstructionists stud-
                     ied in chapter 2, Keynes’s advocacy for state intervention was not the
                     advocacy to emancipate political priorities from economic ones. Quite
                     the contrary: the domain of the political was functional to the repro-
                     duction of the capital order, an order led by the virtuous few.
                        Thus, in line with the very foundations of austerity, in the Keynes-



                     308




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   308        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                            afterword


                     ian framework workers lose economic primacy in the reproduction
                     of capitalism. This loss of economic agency entails a loss of political
                     agency that is handed over to the economic experts. Like his austere
                     colleagues, Keynes is confident that economists are the guardians of
                     classless truths, that they know what is good for the people and should
                     be in charge of economic decisions on their behalf. This means that
                     problems of poverty and unemployment—which deeply affect the con-
                     crete lives of people—are exempt from the political discourse, and are
                     understood as a technical issue to be addressed “in the expert realm
                     of reason and reasonableness” (Mann 2017, 10). Thus, the urge to de-
                     politicize the economic domain persists as a key solution to preserve
                     the social order. Once the capitalist state is neutralized as a suprahistor-
                     ical institution in the hands of experts who can manage the economy
                     for the good of the whole, the state is no longer viewed as the terrain
                     of class struggle, but as the instrument of illuminated technocrats. It is
                     fascinating to note that the very foundation to speak about a big break
                     of Keynesianism with respect to austerity, i.e., the support of a greater
                     role for the state as an economic actor, emerges from the same tech-
                     nocratic intuition: the pillars of capitalism have to be safeguarded, and
                     people should accept the rule of experts.
                        The consequences of a technocratic approach to economic knowl-
                     edge are visible in the New Keynesian stream of thinkers. For ex-
                     ample, the 1984 article by the eminent economists Carl Shapiro and
                     Joseph Stiglitz, “Equilibrium Unemployment as a Worker-Discipline
                     Device”—tellingly formulated at the height of the Reagan-Thatcher
                     crusade against organized labor—“naturalizes” unemployment. The
                     disciplinary equilibrium rate of unemployment ensues as the natural
                     product of the rational decisions of representative agents, certainly
                     not the outcome of the exercise of capitalist power or class conflict.
                     Given the informational asymmetry, and given the tendency of work-
                     ers to shirk, the status quo is vindicated as a rational economic out-
                     come. In line with the mainstream neoclassical framework, New
                     Keynesian economists model workers as being selfish, opportunistic,
                     and lazy. It is a short leap to incorporate in the theoretical framework



                                                                                                     309




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   309        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     afterword


                     to remove the necessity for workers to accept economic sacrifices,
                     especially wage compression and monitoring, for the cause of the
                     greater good.
                        If the lens of austerity permits one to put in question the separation
                     of the Keynesian and neoliberal frameworks, it also certainly makes
                     room for a reassessment of neoliberalism’s history and its origins that
                     Quinn Slobodian’s Globalists (2018) recently revamped. Indeed, recon-
                     structing the austerity project in the immediate aftermath of the Great
                     War allows us to shift the conversation about the longue durée of neo-
                     liberalism into the terrain of class struggle and think of the history of
                     capitalism of the twentieth and twenty-first century in this light.
                        One crucial and often neglected element is the magnitude of the
                     existential threat to capitalism immediately after the Great War—
                     reconstructed in the first half of this book. Slobodian emphasizes the
                     effort to guarantee international economic integration and “global
                     governance” via a legal institutional framework in the face of a crum-
                     bling Habsburg empire. Unlike Globalists, this book studies how, out-
                     side of Eastern and Central Europe, it was class conflict rather than
                     new nation-states that challenged the existing order to its core. Under
                     the guidance of economic experts, austere states actively intervened
                     through economic policies that were key to secure the material disci-
                     plining of the majority through an expropriation of resources and wage
                     curtailment. These policies, and the economic theories that justified
                     them, were vital to revive a smooth functioning of capital accumula-
                     tion, guaranteeing a flow of goods and property rights, both domesti-
                     cally and globally.
                        By telling the story of post–World War I reconstruction through the
                     lens of austerity, this book has demonstrated how austerity was, and
                     remains, an elaborate exercise in class domination. It is unquestionably
                     more pernicious than the traditional telling of this story, one in which
                     an international coalition worked to reestablish the gold standard af-
                     ter the war with the operating intention of securing and stabilizing
                     global international exchanges. (Barry Eichengreen’s well-known 1992
                     book Golden Fetters tells this story most notably.) As this book shows
                     through archival and newly translated material, this “gold effort” was


                     310




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   310        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                            afterword


                     a surface manifestation of something deeper: a technocratic collabora-
                     tion that successfully foreclosed alternatives to capitalism.
                        The dramatic events of the 1929 economic crash and the Great De-
                     pression that followed have attracted no shortage of scholarly attention,
                     a focus that has obscured some of the political and ideological dynam-
                     ics of the years before the Depression and following the Great War. The
                     choice to focus this book on the early 1920s to the exclusion of later
                     years does not take away from this period’s relevance to understand-
                     ing the Depression; as readers will find, a study of austerity serves to
                     untangle the precipitating factors that promoted the crash and exacer-
                     bated the Depression. This is true for Britain, for Italy, and also for the
                     United States—a country that remains in the background of the story
                     but deserves more scrutiny to fully complete the puzzle of the origins
                     of the austerity project as one of class repression. Montgomery (1987)
                     and Migone (2015) provide good grounds to continue such excavation.
                        Finally, this study contributes to debates and reassessments around
                     the history and nature of Italian Fascism (1922–1945) as well as its eco-
                     nomic agenda—especially timely given the centennial anniversary of
                     Mussolini’s rise to power in October 1922. Traditional historiography
                     envisages a discontinuity between Fascism’s initial laissez-faire period
                     (1922–1925) and the corporativist epoch that followed in Italy (usually
                     understood as the “real” expression of Fascism). By viewing this same
                     period through a lens of austerity, in terms of both economic policies
                     and economic ideology, one can observe greater coherence across these
                     two different phases. Austerity, in fact, is the thing that ties the two
                     together. It embodied the active intervention of the state to reinforce
                     capital accumulation through privatizations, bailouts of financial-
                     industrial complexes, monetary deflation, and especially coercive con-
                     trol of labor. Speaking broadly, the nationalist slant of Fascist austerity
                     emerges through the sacrifice of the majority for the saving/investing
                     minority, who purported to represent the interests of the whole na-
                     tion. Our story supports the notion that the interwar economy’s truly
                     Fascist element was its coercive control of the labor force (see Toniolo
                     1980, xii–xiii; and Ciocca 2004, 198–99). Recent scholarship points in
                     a similar direction: it departs from the common understanding of the


                                                                                                      311




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   311        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     afterword


                     1930s as different from the 1920s because of greater social spending.
                     Indeed, it traces the continuities in Fascist policies across the 1920s and
                     1930s by highlighting the gaps between the propaganda of social policy
                     intervention in the 1930s and the paucity and ineffectiveness of state
                     redistributive policies, which actually worsened the living standards of
                     the population (Espuelas 2015; Gabbuti 2020b; Giorgi and Pavan 2021).
                         Of course, this discussion about Fascist economic policies is closely
                     connected to debates on the nature of Fascist economic theories, too. In
                     this domain, my work further corroborates the scholarship of the Ital-
                     ian political scientist Luca Michelini (2011a, 2011b, 2020), who writes:
                     “the relationship between Fascism and economic science cannot be
                     identified with the issue of the birth and affirmation of corporativist
                     doctrine, although that was of considerable importance. No less im-
                     portant, however, was the part played by the ‘Fascist right,’ starting
                     with its founder, Pantaleoni, and passing through those authors and
                     journals that wanted to adapt their theoretical and political teaching to
                     the changing times” (Michelini 2020, 52). Indeed, the “Fascist right” is
                     what I call austere Fascism. Such an austere strand of Fascist economic
                     theory took direct inspiration from the fathers of pure economics.
                     Moreover, it did not just inform the first “liberal” years of Fascist eco-
                     nomic policies; its influence continued during the corporativist phase,
                     as is reflected in the regime’s economic policies. The classist corporative
                     state would safeguard private profit and guarantee the subordination
                     of workers—the core objectives of Pantaleoni’s and Pareto’s austerity
                     project. Such a historical enquiry into the relationship between pure
                     economics, austerity, and Fascism is all the more important if we keep
                     in mind that pure economics constitutes the grammar of present-day
                     mainstream economic thought.




                     312




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   312        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Acknowledgments




                     The Capital Order is the result of much personal sacrifice and profound
                     solidarity among a vast transatlantic community of scholars. Think-
                     ing about the many years that went into completing this all-consuming
                     project, my heart is warmed at the thought of so many mentors and
                     friends who have filled my life with encouragement, insight, and joy. I
                     would like to thank a few of them in chronological order.
                         First and foremost, I am grateful to Professor Giorgio Lunghini, my
                     first academic mentor, who introduced me to the history of economic
                     thought when I was studying philosophy at the University of Pavia and
                     who pushed me to pursue a PhD in economics. It was in fact during
                     my years as a doctoral student at the Sant’Anna School of Advanced
                     Studies, Pisa, that the inspiration for this book first emerged. In 2013, a
                     time when my country was undergoing profound austerity restructur-
                     ing, I first encountered Gianni Toniolo’s L’Economia dell’Italia Fascista.
                     It occurred to me that the parallels between Mussolini’s time and our
                     own, while striking, were unexplored. I am grateful to each mem-
                     ber of the Sant’Anna scholarly community for keeping me motivated
                     at the earliest and therefore most daunting stages of my research. I
                     am perhaps most indebted to Giovanni Dosi, my main supervisor
                     in Sant’Anna, for innumerable fruitful discussions and for his criti-
                     cal spirit that challenged me to keep searching for the right approach
                     to my work. I cherish the enriching conversations with Alessandro


                                                                                                      313




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   313        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     acknowledgments


                     Nuvolari, Andrea Roventini, Alessio Moneta, and Francesco Lam-
                     perti. The exchanges with the historians of economic thought Riccardo
                     Faucci and Luca Michelini made a difference in those years. However,
                     I would have never found the strength to persist in my work, even
                     in the moments of deeper confusion and self-doubt, especially con-
                     cerning my eclectic approach that never fit in any disciplinary canon,
                     without the crucial help of Nicola Giocoli and George Peden, both of
                     whom “adopted” me as a thesis supervisee. Their passionate scholarly
                     conversations and generous help in revising and editing drafts was a
                     most precious gift. I have fond memories of my time in Callander as a
                     guest of George and his wife Alison, when I was well fed and learned
                     how to best approach archival research while taking long walks in the
                     Scottish plains.
                         During my two-year stay in Rome, where I undertook much of the
                     archival work that informs this book, the regular mentorship of Pier-
                     luigi Ciocca was the biggest honor I could have hoped for. The almost
                     weekly visits in his magnificent office filled with books in Corso Vit-
                     torio inspired both personal and scholarly enthusiasm for the proj-
                     ect. Thanks to Pierluigi’s support I was able to access the library of the
                     Banca d’Italia, a magical environment where the rarest books can be
                     retrieved. In those years, the encounters (which still continue today)
                     with Gianni Toniolo and Robert Skidelsky, two leaders of their field,
                     were another immense scholarly treat.
                         The support of the Young Scholar Initiative (YSI) of the Institute for
                     New Economic Thinking, which generously funded conferences and
                     workshops, boosted my enthusiasm for this research immeasurably. I
                     would like to thank all of the members of the YSI community for all
                     the exciting intellectual exchanges, in particular Robert Johnson and
                     Jay Pocklington for their dedication to a project that deeply inspires
                     young thinkers.
                         This book would never have taken the form it has without the life-
                     changing experience of being hired in 2016 as an assistant professor
                     in the economics department of the New School for Social Research,
                     where I refined (and continue to refine) a Marxian perspective in po-
                     litical economy. I am enormously grateful to everyone involved in the


                     314




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   314        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   acknowledgments


                     hiring process, and especially to Anwar Shaikh, who believed in my
                     work from the moment he read the first draft of my PhD thesis. Indeed,
                     persistent interlocution with my colleagues Anwar Shaikh and Dun-
                     can Foley was crucial for refining my theoretical lens. I am especially
                     grateful for Duncan’s dedication in the latest book-writing process: his
                     meticulous comments on every chapter and our regular lunches on the
                     Upper West Side to discuss the material are among my best memories
                     of this intellectual adventure. Of course, I cannot go without thanking
                     my colleagues Ying Chen, Teresa Ghilarducci, Paulo Dos Santos, Willi
                     Semmler, Mark Setterfield, Sanjay Reddy, and Will Milberg for their
                     insights and especially for their professional support.
                        Among the most remarkable characteristics of the New School for
                     Social Research is the tightly knit scholarly and human community that
                     goes well beyond the department and the discipline. The conversations
                     with philosophers Cinzia Aruzza, Richard Bernstein, and Sandro Mez-
                     zadra (visiting for a year from Bologna); historians Aaron Jakes, Emma
                     Park, and Julia Ott (Director of the Robert L. Heilbroner Center for
                     Capitalism Studies, which helped support my research); political sci-
                     entists Andrew Arato, Quentin Bruneau, Carlos Forment, and Andreas
                     Kalyvas have been eye-opening and tremendously joyful.
                        The academic year I spent at the Institute for Advanced Studies in
                     2018–2019 was a blessing: a temporary escape from hectic New York life
                     in which I could find the peace of mind that allowed me to transform
                     scattered pieces of research into systematic chapters. Munirah Khayyat,
                     Rima Majed, Daniel Aldana Cohen, Maggie Hennefeld, David Bond,
                     Didier Fassin, Nicola di Cosmo, and Myles Jackson are great schol-
                     ars and friends who have made my experience at IAS unique. Special
                     thanks are due to Marcia Tucker, head librarian at IAS, whose profes-
                     sionalism and devotion allowed me to systematically uncover hidden
                     research material. I am grateful for all the Monday mornings Marcia
                     and I spent discussing weekly research goals and the primary sources
                     to investigate. Her capacity to find the most precious archival mate-
                     rial, up until the very end of the writing process, is what made this
                     book as rich as it is. During that academic year I received an invitation
                     to participate in the Remarque Institute’s Kandersteg seminar titled


                                                                                                      315




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   315        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     acknowledgments


                     “Revisiting 1919,” where the conversations with Susan Pedersen and
                     many other participants left a positive trace.
                         I would like to recognize the indispensable role of Sam Salour, who
                     in the year at IAS and beyond has been the greatest source of inspira-
                     tion: an intellectual and emotional pillar in my life and a true comrade.
                     With him I was able to transform my research into a systematic intel-
                     lectual endeavor. The full extent of my gratitude for his care, dedica-
                     tion, and patience is beyond verbalization.
                         In January 2020, when I was back in New York, overworked by
                     teaching and immensely worried about my tenure process, I received a
                     life-changing email from Chad Zimmerman, brilliant executive editor
                     at the University of Chicago Press, inquiring into my work. In addition
                     to his unbridled enthusiasm for the project, Chad’s editorial and intel-
                     lectual sagacity made the book what it is. I cannot thank Chad enough
                     for his constructive and creative engagement, but most especially for
                     his unwavering support. I am immensely grateful to Zvi Ben-Dor
                     Benite for his kindness and generosity during the earliest months of
                     the editorial process.
                         In the last phases of writing the manuscript, a couple of workshops
                     with close friends and colleagues gave me indispensable input. For their
                     friendship and dedication I thank Basma N. Radwan, Alex Zevin, Luca
                     Falciola, Carlo Invernizzi, Amana Fontanella-Khan, Quentin Bruneau,
                     Aaron Jakes, Nick Mulder, Jeremy Kessler, Barnabie Reine, Siavash
                     Radpour, Andreas Kalyvas, and Teddy Paikin. Special thanks to Homa
                     Zarghamee, whose input, especially for the book proposal, was vital,
                     and to Adam Tooze, who not only sparked one of the most exciting
                     historical discussions at my manuscript workshop, but whose influence
                     over these last years has been of incalculable value for my intellectual
                     development. I am most grateful to James Galbraith for his friendship,
                     unequivocal intellectual prowess, and encouraging feedback through-
                     out these years of research and writing. Thank you to Stephen Meardon
                     for his generosity in friendship and intellectual collaboration, to Susan
                     Howson for having read and commented on my manuscript with im-
                     portant critical insight, and to Giacomo Gabbuti whose feedback and
                     expertise, especially for the quantitative chapter, was invaluable. Gia-


                     316




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   316        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   acknowledgments


                     como organized a workshop in Oxford in October 2019 on the Italian
                     economy under Fascism that opened the door for a holistic exchange of
                     ideas among scholars in the field. A special thanks to Professor Roberto
                     Marchionatti, an authority in the history of economic thought, for en-
                     riching and thorough conversations in his office at the Fondazione
                     Luigi Einaudi in Turin, the center he runs. I also thank all of the staff of
                     the Fondazione for their prompt practical help in the research.
                        My deepest and most sincere thanks go to my graduate student
                     Aditya Singh, a brilliant up-and-coming political economist, whose
                     daily support made the final writing process a joyful experience and
                     without whose presence this book would never have been delivered
                     with the timing that it was. I also thank Lauren Sweger-Hollingsworth,
                     Cesar Garcia, Ricardo Hernandez, Lauren Johnston, Penelope Kyritsis,
                     and Marc Triller, my talented graduate students at the New School,
                     whose critique and feedback was most timely.
                        A final word on Gianfranco Mattei. At the young age of twenty-
                     seven, Gianfranco was already a professor of chemistry at the Poly-
                     technic School of Milan and collaborating with his comrades in the
                     GAP (a partisan unit operating in Italian cities) at their secret site at
                     Via Santa Giulia 25 bs, Rome, to design bombs to be used against the
                     Fascists. It was not long before a whistleblower compromised him and
                     his comrades. He was taken to the infamous prison of Via Tasso, where
                     the Fascist militia brutally tortured members of the political opposition
                     to obtain information about the mounting anti-Fascist resistance.
                        Gianfranco is my great-uncle, child of my great-grandmother Clara
                     Mattei, whose name I carry. Following two days of constant brutaliza-
                     tion, Gianfranco hanged himself with his belt rather than betray his com-
                     rades in the resistance. His last words, written on the back of a check and
                     surreptitiously passed to his cellmate, were for his parents: “Siate forti,
                     sapendo che lo sono stato anche io” (Be strong, knowing that I also was).
                        The memory of his courageous sacrifice to protect his comrades,
                     his resolute battle against the oppressor, and his selfless dedication to
                     changing the world for all animates my life with personal and political
                     purpose. To my great-uncle Gianfranco Mattei, and to revolutionaries
                     everywhere, I dedicate this book.


                                                                                                      317




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   317        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   318        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Notes




                     Introduction

                        1   Luis Ferré-Sadurní and Jesse McKinley, “N.Y. Hospitals Face $400 Million
                            in Cuts Even as Virus Battle Rages,” New York Times, March 30, 2020,
                            https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/30/nyregion/coronavirus-hospitals
                            -medicaid-budget.html.
                        2   Camila Vergara, “The Meaning of Chile’s Explosion,” Jacobin Magazine,
                            October 29, 2019, https://www.jacobinmag.com/2019/10/chile-protests
                            -sebastian-pinera-constitution-neoliberalism.
                        3   “Third Greece Bailout: What Are Eurozone conditions?” BBC News, Au-
                            gust 21, 2015, https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-33905686.
                        4   See Peter Coy, “Why are Fast Food Workers Signing Noncompete Agree-
                            ments?,” New York Times, September 29, 2021, https://www.nytimes
                            .com/2021/09/29/opinion/noncompete-agreement-workers.html.
                        5   Saez and Zucman (2019).
                        6   Throughout this book the term “state” is preferred over the term “govern-
                            ment.” This is because while the words are often used interchangeably, the
                            state is more than just governments (understood as particular executives
                            in charge). The state is embodied in a plurality of institutions and is the
                            sum of all of these—legislative bodies (parliaments), judiciary bodies
                            (the courts), executive bodies (government in charge: ministers, or other
                            elected officials), administrative bodies (state agencies concerned with the
                            management of the economy, such as central banks), and law enforcement
                            bodies (police, etc.). In Ralph Miliband’s words: “What ‘the state’ stands
                            for is a number of particular institutions, which, together, constitute its
                            reality, and which interact as parts of what may be called the state system”
                            (Miliband 1969, 49).
                        7   Blyth (2013, 203).
                        8   For a full-blown economic analysis of the dynamics of the capitalist system



                                                                                                      319




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   319        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 5–18


                            as one driven by profit, and thus real competition amongst private busi-
                            nesses to attain such profit, see Shaikh (2016).
                        9   Gallacher and Campbell (1972, 12).
                       10   Einaudi (1959–65, 904); Togliatti (1919b).
                       11   “Reconstruction in Europe,” Manchester Guardian Commercial, May 18,
                            1922, p. 66.
                       12   For a history of austerity policies that European empires implemented in
                            their colonies, see Park et al. (2021). The history of austerity practices in
                            European colonies does not figure in this work because, as I explain, the
                            mode of austerity described herein depends on practices of democratic
                            contestation which were only legible by virtue of actors’ legal equality,
                            which (by virtue of politico-legal arrangements) was nonexistent in Euro-
                            pean colonies.
                       13   Maffeo Pantaleoni (Brussels 1920, vol. 4.107).
                       14   Milanović (2019, 2).
                       15   Skidelsky (2009); Krugman (2015).
                       16   The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, vol. 10, 1971–1989 (Cam-
                            bridge: Cambridge University Press), 446–47.
                       17   Mann (2017) argues that the legacy of Keynesianism is haunted by the
                            potential collapse of civilization that is inevitably understood as the capital-
                            ist civilization: “As Keynes’ theory of civilization makes clear, because the
                            bourgeois cannot imagine a non-bourgeois society, it cannot conceive of its
                            own end as anything else but the end of the world” (Mann 2017, 23). Mann’s
                            reflections find even sturdier grounds if one places Keynes in the context of
                            the aftermath of the Great War.
                       18   To be sure, while central to explaining the downturn, austerity policies
                            were not the only factors that contributed to it. Simon Clarke, for example,
                            stresses overproduction and a lack of global competitiveness as important
                            reasons for the break of the British postwar boom (Clarke 1988, 209–10).
                       19   Pigou (1947, 43). Average weekly earnings for all manual workers dropped
                            from £3.7 in 1920 to £2.61 in 1923 (see Scholliers and Zamagni 1995).
                       20   Dr. Alfred Salter, 161 Parl. Deb. H.C. (March 7, 1923), cols. 627–75.
                       21   For example, in a 2020 analysis (https://www.oxfam.org/en/blogs/virus
                            -austerity-covid-19-spending-accountability-and-recovery-measures
                            -agreed-between-imf-and) Oxfam finds that 76 out of the 91 IMF loans
                            negotiated with eighty-one countries since March 2020—when the pan-
                            demic was declared—push for belt-tightening that could result in deep cuts
                            to public healthcare systems and pension schemes; wage freezes and cuts
                            for public sector workers such as doctors, nurses, and teachers; and cuts to
                            unemployment benefits, like sick pay (see also https://www.oxfam.org/en/
                            press-releases/imf-paves-way-new-era-austerity-post-covid-19).
                       22   To be sure, I am not claiming that austerity is the only factor to explain
                            wage repression, let alone to explain inequality. For example, global move-



                     320




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   320        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                 notes to pages 18–29


                            ment of capital in search of cheaper labor and technology shifts are factors
                            that have attracted the majority of the workforce within service sectors
                            characterized by low productivity and precarious work hours (see Taylor
                            and Ömer 2020).
                       23   See Istituto Nazionale di Statistica (June 16, 2021). The level of absolute
                            poverty is calculated as the monetary value at current prices of the basket
                            of goods and services that are considered essential for each family, based
                            on the age of each of its members, geographical allocation, and the place of
                            residence (Istituto Nazionale di Statistica [February 2, 2021]).
                       24   Inman and Booth (2019). For official statistics see Department for Work
                            and Pensions, “Households Below Average Income (HBAI) Statistics,”
                            https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/households-below-average
                            -income-hbai--2.
                       25   Shaikh (2016, 60).
                       26   See Wartzman (2020); for the RAND working paper Wartzman references,
                            see Price and Edwards (2020).
                       27   Stein (2006).



                     Part I

                        1   On the history and the development of early capitalism and its entrench-
                            ment see Wood (1999), Polanyi (1944), North and Thomas (1973).



                     Chapter One

                        1   Caracciolo (1969, 163–219).
                        2   Under pre-war laissez-faire capitalism, the state had a limited role: for
                            example, in Victorian Britain, considered the epitome of laissez-faire, the
                            state had a say in three limited economic spheres: social policy, finance,
                            and commercial relations with foreign powers: “[G]overnment, apart
                            from the Post Office and a few naval and military establishments, did not
                            own or administer business undertakings, did not concern itself with the
                            organization of industry or the marketing of its products, did not attempt
                            directly to influence the course of trade, and rarely intervened, except as a
                            borrower, in the money or capital markets” (Tawney 1943, 1).
                        3   J. A. Salter formulates a description that can be applied to the whole con-
                            trol mechanism developed during the war: “it is important to remember
                            that control was extended step by step by the compelling forces of circum-
                            stances. It was already almost complete before it was adopted as a deliber-
                            ate policy. Each new extension was normally undertaken reluctantly as the
                            only method of meeting an immediate emergency” (Salter 1921, 62).



                                                                                                      321




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   321        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 29 –32


                        4   These rates, circulated as a government document or “Blue Book,” were
                            arbitration prices settled by a committee of seventy-two, representing the
                            government, shipowners, cargo owners, the marine insurance business,
                            deck officers, and seamen; the owners, with twenty-four, formed the largest
                            group. As set, they yielded an average annual profit of over 10 percent on
                            the book value of the ships. Sir Leo Chiozza Money notes that “Liberal as
                            they were, however, the Blue Book Rates were far below the extravagant
                            market rates caused by the shortage of tonnage” (Chiozza Money 1920, 73).
                        5   Until the war, both Britain and Italy loyally embodied the balanced budget
                            tradition: expenditures were minimal and matched revenues. However,
                            by 1918, Britain’s central government expenditures had soared to nearly
                            fourteen times their 1913 level, and Italy’s had risen by almost nine times
                            (Mitchell 1998, Table G-5, 820–21). Revenues could no longer keep pace.
                        6   For an explanation of the mechanism of the gold standard, see Barry
                            Eichengreen’s 1992 classic, Golden Fetters.
                        7   During the war, Britain’s exchange rate was supported by foreign borrow-
                            ing and formal or informal restrictions on gold movements (Moggridge
                            1972, 18). No longer under the grip of the gold standard, the state could
                            increase credit circulation and imports without fearing a reflexive outflow
                            of gold and a currency devaluation that would instigate a credit contraction
                            to avoid unpegging from the standard. The state could also borrow from
                            banks who, free from the “golden fetter,” could issue credit beyond the
                            nation’s gold reserves. For a detailed analysis of war finances in Britain see
                            Morgan (1952) and Peden (2000); on Italian war finances see Einaudi (1933,
                            27–57), Frascani (1975, 1–85), Forsyth (1993).
                        8   Britain and Italy declared a “state of exception” so as to give much greater
                            powers to the government, increase military powers in the civil sphere, and
                            shorten administrative procedures. However, while the British Parliament
                            maintained a function of control, in Italy the parliament was stripped of all
                            its powers. Indeed, on May 22, 1915, a law of full powers granted the gov-
                            ernment power to legislate (through decreti legge) without passing through
                            parliament in all matters “regarding the defence of the State, the safeguard
                            of public order and the urgent and extraordinary needs of the national
                            economy.” Overall, the British chamber had 423 sessions between 1915 and
                            1917 while the Italian chamber gathered only 158 times (Procacci 1983, 44).
                        9   In the case of Italy, for example, Article 7 of the royal decree of June 26, 1915
                            (Royal Decree 997, in GU 177 [June 26, 1915], 4296), reads: “industrialists
                            cannot refuse the production and distribution of the necessary material for
                            war. In the case in which they ask for prices that are excessively high, they
                            will have to accept the payment that will be established by the administra-
                            tion” (Franchini 1928, 81).
                       10   With the Treasury Agreement (that gave life to the Munitions Act) work-
                            ers’ unions had successfully obtained a munitions levy on the controlled



                     322




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   322        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 32–34


                            establishments of 100 percent on all profits above a prewar “standard” plus
                            20 percent. However, this tax was easily evaded by capital expenditure,
                            wear-and-tear allowances, and other methods which made the concept
                            of standard meaningless. Its yield was negligible (Pollard 1969, 64). The
                            Excess Profits Duty (EPD) introduced in the second budget of 1915 (which
                            also applied to firms other than controlled establishments) was more suc-
                            cessful. It encompassed a quarter of the British war revenue. Its average
                            rate during the war was 63 percent, yet only around 34 percent was actually
                            collected due to much evasion, delay, and fraudulent taxes. Munitions
                            firms were actually exempt from EPD until 1917. On war taxation see
                            Daunton (2002, 36–59).
                       11   In the age of steam, coal had become the key source of power. Further, in
                            1913 Britain was still by far the largest exporter of coal. During a national
                            mining conference held in London in July 1915, Prime Minister Lloyd
                            George gave an apt characterization of the centrality of coal in Britain:
                            “In time of peace coal is the most important element in the industrial life
                            of this country. The blood which courses through the veins of industry in
                            the country is made of distilled coal. In peace and in war King coal is the
                            paramount Lord of industry. It enters into every article of consumption
                            and utility; it is our real international coinage. When we buy goods, food
                            and raw material abroad we pay not in gold but in coal” (Redmayne 1923,
                            2). On the coal industry during and after the war, see Armitage (1969,
                            101–58), Hurwitz (1949), Kirby (1977). About the control of coal in Italy, see
                            Franchini (1932, 39–40).
                       12   For a thorough description of state wool purchase and manufacture in
                            Britain see Lloyd (1924, 125–48).
                       13   On the British Ministry of Munitions and its technology research, see
                            Wrigley (in Burk 1982, 47–49). In Italy, the results of industrial innova-
                            tion research were diffused through the bollettino del comitato generale di
                            mobilitazione industriale.
                       14   For a detailed analysis of the role of the Italian regional committees, see
                            Franchini (1928).
                       15   Agriculture commissioners at the provincial, municipal, and intramunici-
                            pal levels [commissari agricoli privinciali, comunali, and inter-comunali]
                            coordinated the public management of agriculture (see De Stefani 1926a,
                            109). Through these institutions, the state also imposed forced labor in
                            the fields [obbligatorietà delle prestazioni] and hired military men and war
                            prisoners for agricultural work.
                       16   See the royal decrees of May 10, 1917, n. 788; October 4, 1917, n. 1614; and
                            February 14, 1918, n. 147. See also De Stefani (1926a, 112–13).
                       17   On the complex institutional structure that dealt with Italian food policy,
                            see De Stefani (1926a, 257–71) and Bachi (1926, 151–65).
                       18   “At the outbreak of the War, Britain imported from abroad four-fifth of



                                                                                                      323




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   323        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 34–37


                            the cereals consumed, two-fifths of the meat, three-quarters of the fruit,
                            besides all the sugar and colonial products and substantial proportions of
                            other food-stuffs” (see Pollard 1969, 58). Like Britain, Italy too was highly
                            dependent on imports for much of its food necessities. During the war,
                            15–20 percent of Italian imports came from Britain (Zamagni 1990, 280).
                            To tackle the war emergency, the royal decree of August 31, 1918, “granted
                            to the State no less than the imports of all military and nonmilitary mate-
                            rial necessary for the country and their redistribution to the commercial
                            and industrial bodies through rationing” (Porisini 1975, 57). For details on
                            the regulation of international and local import and export see De Stefani
                            (1926a, 206–23).
                       19   According to state official Leo Chiozza Money, “If the bulk purchases had
                            not been made and if the buying had been left to the ordinary private
                            enterprise agencies, our raw materials would have cost us several times as
                            much, if we had got them at all” (Chiozza Money 1920, 128).
                       20   In Britain, “4,970,000 men were enlisted in the army, 407,000 in the navy,
                            and 293,000 in the air-force out of a total male labour force of some 15 mil-
                            lion” (Wrigley 1987, 23). Only a year into the war, voluntary enlistment had
                            already caused an immediate shortage of labor: “By July 1915 the estimated
                            drop in total occupied male population employed in coal and other mining
                            was 21.8 percent, iron and steel 18.8 percent, engineering 19.5 percent, electri-
                            cal engineering 23.7 percent and shipbuilding 16.5 percent” (Wrigley 1987, 24).
                       21   The 1911 census suggests a total male labor force (occupied and unoccu-
                            pied) of 15,093,000. Given that around 5,670,000 were recruited during the
                            war, the available male labor force was around 9.5 million. This calculation
                            does not consider the change in the sex composition of the labor force that
                            occurred during the war. More women were employed in industries during
                            the war. For example, while in 1914 the proportion of women in the indus-
                            try and transport sectors was 23 percent, it rose to 34 percent by 1918. The
                            number of women considered gainfully employed grew from slightly under
                            6 million in July 1914 to 7,311,000 in July 1918, or from 31 percent to 37 per-
                            cent of all women and girls over the age of ten. (For details on women and
                            the labor market during the war see Pedersen 1993, chapter 2, 72–133.)
                       22   On the vast topic of state repression of the working class in Italy during the
                            war, which extended well beyond the factory, see Procacci 2013; Procacci
                            1999; Procacci and Corner 1997; and Procacci (ed.) 1983, in particular the
                            chapter titled “La legislazione repressiva e la sua applicazione,” 41–59.
                       23   L’Internazionale di fronte allo scoppio della guerra was a pamphlet commis-
                            sioned by the Socialist parliamentary group (written by Giuseppe Ema-
                            nuele Modigliani in 1916) to explain the reasons for the socialist opposition
                            to the War. See Vivarelli 1967, 56.
                       24   See Luigi Tomassini, “Gli effetti sociali della mobilitazione industriale:
                            industriali, lavoratori, Stato” in Menozzi et al. (eds.) 2010, 25–57.



                     324




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   324        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 37–40


                       25   For details on the militarization of the Italian labor force, see Franchini
                            (1928), Labanca and Procacci (2018), Tomassini (1991).
                       26   A law passed on November 5, 1916, that strictly defined crimes and
                            punishment. The state punished the abandonment of work with military
                            incarceration for 1 to 2 years, and it punished the unauthorized movement
                            of labor with jail for 2 to 6 months. Refusal to obey corresponded to jail
                            for up to 1 year and assault against a superior could lead to a 15- to 24-year
                            jail sentence. Einaudi remarks that “the results achieved with the meth-
                            ods of military coercion were remarkable. The absences from work, that
                            touched 8.40 before militarization, decreased to 4.88 immediately after”
                            (Einaudi 1933, 113).
                       27   For a detailed analysis of the various means the state used to discipline
                            labor for war production in Britain and of unions’ compliance with these
                            means, see Rubin (1987, chapter 7, 178–202).
                       28   In Italy, factory committees were born at the beginning of the century,
                            more as spontaneous forms of workers’ representation to deal with indus-
                            trial disputes than as permanent organs of representation. With the war,
                            their role was de facto legitimized even if de jure this occurred only in 1918
                            (see Spriano 1960, 467–71).
                       29   See statistics in Franchini (1928, 123). On Italian women labor force during
                            the war see Camarda and Peli (1980, 21–42) and Isnenghi (1982, 237–48).
                       30   Other techniques for expanding the pool of labor included the suspension
                            of migratory rights, the exemption of soldiers (especially skilled work-
                            ers) from the front to work in war industries, the employment of colonial
                            manpower, and the compulsory enlistment of war prisoners or inmates.
                       31   Scholars note that Italy’s enhanced productivity in the war industries did
                            not derive so much from technological advancement in industrial organi-
                            zation as from an increase in employment and especially an intensification
                            of the exploitation of the workforce (see Alessandro Camarda, “Salari,
                            organizzazione e condizioni di lavoro,” in Procacci [ed.] 1983, 166).
                       32   In just the auxiliary factories of Milan in 1916, more than half a million
                            working days were lost due to accidents (see Renzo Paci, “Le trasforma-
                            zioni ed innovazioni nella struttura economica italiana,” in Caracciolo
                            1968, 52–53). On the issue of workplace accidents see Camarda and Peli
                            (1980, 65–71) and “Il problema sociale dell’infortunio sul lavoro” in Il
                            bollettino del comitato centrale di mobilitazione (February-March 1918,
                            96–103). In Britain the registered accidents increased from 14 percent to
                            48 percent, while professional illnesses increased significantly in all coun-
                            tries. For example, production of explosives caused increases in workplace
                            exposure to toxic substances. On the Italian phenomenon of the so-called
                            lunedianti—that is, those who would not show up to work on Mondays—
                            see Camarda and Peli (1980, 72–83).
                       33   The priority of productivity impacted a wide range of factory services.



                                                                                                      325




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   325        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 41–43


                            The state ran and subsidized them. In controlled establishments, factory
                            canteens provided cheap hot meals (by the end of 1918, 900 canteens were
                            expected to be feeding an industrial population of close to one million—
                            see His Majesty’s Stationery Office 1918a, 195), and the state had established
                            health centers and drinking facilities as well as better sanitary and washing
                            facilities. Regarding the canteens, the 1918 report states that the Munitions
                            (Food) Committee recorded its judgment that the canteen’s “high value as
                            an agency of improved nutrition, and therefore increased energy and out-
                            put is beyond doubt. Not only must this value be retained and enhanced,
                            but steps should be taken to encourage an extension of the movement in all
                            practical ways” (ibid.).
                       34   On piecework and how it changed the wage structure in Italy see Camarda
                            and Peli (1980, 121–33).
                       35   The 1920 Committee of Enquiry into the work of the employment ex-
                            changes attests the extended role of these institutions in controlling labor
                            during the war. In its report we read: “Much additional work fell upon the
                            Exchanges during the war. Very many workers and employers were under
                            obligation to go to the Exchanges during this period, and the average
                            daily number of vacancies filled rose to 4,713 during the first six months of
                            1916, and to 5,071 during the first six months of 1918” (Ministry of Labour
                            1920, 6).
                       36   Another telling example of the power wielded by the state in directing
                            labor mobility across the nation is the recruitment of Italian civilian labor
                            to work on the front line in the logistical services. This was a relevant
                            experiment in terms of organized migrations: in 1916 and 1917 the state dis-
                            placed more than 210,000 workers from southern regions (Sicily, Calabria,
                            Abruzzo, Puglia, Campania) to the areas behind the front (see Ermacora
                            2007; see also Ermacora 2005, 53–54, 63–64, 89–92, 134).
                       37   To read more on dilution in Britain during the war see Wolfe (1923, chap-
                            ter 9, 148–73); Cole (1923, chapter 6, 83–114; chapter 8, 129–41). For a good
                            discussion of the process of dilution in Italy and skilled workers’ loss of
                            autonomy, see Bezza (1982, 75–78).
                       38   For an analysis of the malfunctioning of the bargaining process in Britain
                            at the beginning of the war and the gradual push to state intervention, see
                            Cole (1915, chapter 6, 138–67).
                       39   The Committee on Production (founded in February 1915) remained in
                            place until the end of the war, and was then reappointed as a Court of
                            Arbitration under the Wages (Temporary Regulation) Act of 1918.
                       40   One of the first acts of Lloyd George as prime minister was the creation
                            of the Ministry of Labour in December 1916. It was formed by removing
                            the board of trade’s semi-autonomous labor departments (the employ-
                            ment department dealing with employment exchanges and unemployment
                            insurance; the chief industrial commissioner department, with responsibil-



                     326




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   326        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                 notes to pages 44–47


                            ity over the conciliation and arbitration services; and the Trade Boards De-
                            partment responsible for overseeing minimum wages in nine trades) and
                            combining them under a new ministry. In 1917 the ministry created two
                            divisions: a labor intelligence division to prepare a weekly report on the
                            labor situation for the war cabinet, and a Joint Industrial Councils division
                            to promote the establishment of Whitley councils throughout the industry.
                            For details on the ministry and its administrative difficulties, see Rodney
                            Lowe’s “The Ministry of Labour, 1916–1919: A Still, Small Voice?” in Burk
                            (1982, 108–35).
                       41   The government extended arbitration beyond the auxiliary establishments
                            to industries in the war zones and to those that “were important for the
                            economic life of the country.” For details on the Italian arbitration proce-
                            dure, see Franchini (1932, 162–66).
                       42   The 1918 report also states: “Meanwhile, despite the heavy claims in 1918 of
                            the Army, the Navy, munitions, shipbuilding and transport, the output was
                            well maintained, and in some cases remarkably increased, in the two other
                            great fields of production, namely, raw materials and food” (His Majesty’s
                            Stationery Office 1919, x).
                       43   Sir Leo Chiozza Money writes that, difficult as it was, “The soldiers
                            obtained their food, munitions and supplies. The civilian population was
                            maintained in a fair degree of comfort. Essential trades such as the cotton
                            industry had proper consideration, and were given such supplies of mate-
                            rial as to preserve their existence” (Chiozza Money 1920, 89).
                       44   “New Ideals in Politics,” The Times, November 18, 1918, 4.
                       45   “A Nationalization Proposal,” The Times, December 11, 1918, 16. Winston
                            Churchill was a Conservative from 1900 to 1904; he then joined the Liberal
                            Party from 1904–1924, and finally reverted back to the Conservative party
                            from 1924 until the end of his political career.
                       46   The original enquiry on war expenditures 1920–1923 is republished in
                            Crocella et al. (2002).
                       47   “Le ricerche statistiche per la mobilitazione industriale e gli ammaestra-
                            menti per il dopoguerra,” in Il bollettino del comitato centrale di mobilita-
                            zione industriale, October 1917, 130.
                       48   The Economist, which represented the epitome of pure liberalism, was
                            strongly against state intervention in the economy, of course. For example,
                            as early as December 21, 1918, it exhorted the government to stop its prac-
                            tice of paying “people for putting difficulties in the way of private enter-
                            prise.” For an excellent long-term historical study of the position, ideology,
                            and impacts of the magazine, see Zevin (2019).
                       49   Italy’s industrial mobilization apparatus was dismantled soon after the
                            armistice and, after a brief parenthesis, so was the state’s control over agri-
                            cultural production and prices (see Paola Carucci, “Funzioni e caratteri del
                            ministero per le armi e munizioni,” in Procacci 1983, 60–79). As for Britain,



                                                                                                       327




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   327        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 47–48


                            the largest part of its decontrol process coincided with the extensive auster-
                            ity measures of 1921 that we will study in the second part of this book. That
                            year the Ministry of Munitions, the Ministry of Food, and the Coal Control
                            Department were dissolved, as well as the Railway Executive (see Tawney
                            1943).
                       50   Daily Herald, July 10, 1919, p. 1 (late London edition); Daily Herald, August
                            26, 1919, p. 5.
                       51   “Profiteering Is a Plague: How It Has Reduced the People to Poverty and Is
                            Building Up a C3 Nation,” Daily Herald, August 25, 1919, 5.
                       52   In fact, the state acted to limit the priorities of profit in the national inter-
                            est: “it assumed control for the duration of the war over a great number of
                            the larger private undertakings, it has limited profits by imposing an 80 per
                            cent excess profits tax, and it has intervened to prevent profiteering in the
                            essential requirements of the nation” (HMSO 1918a, xvi). Further, employ-
                            ers were subjected to managerial interference, governmental scrutiny, and
                            oversight (see Pedersen 1993, 84; Rubin 1987, 20–23).
                       53   For example, in Britain, the Ministry of Munitions cooperated with the
                            home office to promote civic recreation schemes. Most importantly,
                            between 1914 and 1918 there was a major expansion in welfare services
                            for mothers and infants. The Maternity and Child Welfare Act of 1918
                            consolidated and extended previous schemes: the appointment of health
                            visitors, maternity and child welfare centers, midwifery service, and
                            maternity homes and hospitals for nursing mothers and babies. Creches,
                            day nurseries, and homes for orphan or illegitimate children multiplied
                            to allow women to go out to work (HMSO 1919a, 286). Local government
                            boards were in charge of protecting the welfare of the blind, supervising
                            the treatment of tuberculosis, and preventing infectious and epidemic
                            diseases. In 1917, the state introduced the free treatment of venereal disease
                            for civilians as well as for soldiers. Scholars have described this measure as
                            “the first installment of a free national health service” (Titmuss 2018, 48).
                            We will discuss this subject matter further in chapter 2.
                       54   The literature on the nature of the development of the Italian industrial
                            sector during the war years is extensive. Luciano Segreto (1982, 146–47)
                            provides a good overview of both the productive and technical achieve-
                            ments the dark side of such expansion. Many scholars have studied the
                            processes of vertical and horizontal integration that occurred between the
                            financial and industrial sectors in those years (see in particular Romeo
                            1972, 115–26; Castronovo 1982, 139–46; Castronovo 1995, 203–7; Grifone
                            1971, 22–31).
                       55   For a detailed enquiry on the frauds and abuses, see “L’inchiesta parlamen-
                            tare sulle spese di guerra (1920–1923)” in Crocella et al., eds. (2002).
                       56   For example, in 1914 Fiat had 4,300 workers; that number grew to more




                     328




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   328        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   notes to pages 49–50


                            than 40,000 in 1918. In 1914 it produced 4,800 automotive vehicles, and
                            by 1918 its production rose to 70,862, of which 63,000 were for the Ital-
                            ian government. The aeronautic industry, practically nonexistent in 1913,
                            employed by the end of the war around 100,000 workers. The chemical and
                            textile industries also developed impressively, especially because of large
                            state subsidies and direct intervention to support their technical apparatus,
                            for example with the formation of the committee for chemical industries
                            [Comitato per le industrie chimiche] (see De Stefani 1926a, 151–53).
                       57   Zaganella (2017, 190). The declared profits of the public limited compa-
                            nies jumped from 4 percent on the eve of the war to 8 percent in 1917. The
                            profits of iron and steel industries jumped from 6 percent to 17 percent,
                            automobiles from 8 percent to 31 percent, and wool from 5 percent to 19
                            percent (Porisini 1975, 34).
                       58   On the decline of real wages during the war, see Zamagni (1991, tables 2
                            and 3, 140–47). Severe rationing, low agricultural production, and inflation
                            were such that by 1917—when imports were limited by the German sub-
                            marine war—working classes in the big Italian cities were at their survival
                            limits (Bachi 1926, 159). In the countryside, the absence of male workforce
                            and food requisitioning for the army made conditions all the more unbear-
                            able. The words of Ernesto Ragionieri are telling: “Perhaps due account
                            has not been given to the fact that the excess of deaths in the civilian
                            population during the war surpasses six hundred thousand with respect
                            to the prior period matching the number of the dead at the front” (in Fava
                            1982, 176). For a detailed analysis of the social impacts of inflation and the
                            worsening living conditions of workers in different sectors of the economy,
                            see Frascani (1975, 59–83).
                       59   Unlike Italy, in Britain the state’s efforts in maintaining the levels of agricul-
                            tural production and imports of consumption goods, rationing, and rent
                            control raised the living expectations of the poorest, while public health
                            and food quality improved (Procacci 2013, 48). While in Italy average real
                            daily earnings decreased during the war years (falling continuously from
                            1915 to 1918), in Britain the average weekly real wages increased over the
                            same period (rising continuously from 1913 to 1919). See figures 9.7 and 9.8
                            in chapter 9.
                       60   Regarding Britain, Pedersen writes: “The preservation of working-class
                            organization in Britain meant that the labor movement was, from the
                            beginning, aware of its strength and able to set some conditions for its
                            cooperation in the prosecution of the war” (Pedersen 1993, 82).
                       61   Under the war government of Lloyd George, Labour MP Arthur Hen-
                            derson joined the War Cabinet. John Hodge, the secretary of the Steel
                            Smelters, and George Barnes, the former secretary of the Amalgamated En-
                            gineers, took the new posts of minister of labour and minister of pensions,




                                                                                                          329




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   329        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.               6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 50–56


                            respectively. Thereafter, trade union views were regularly expounded to the
                            Cabinet. Several other Labour MPs—also former trade-union officials—
                            were appointed to junior offices.
                       62   For example, in 1916 La mobilitazione industriale appointed “la commis-
                            sione cottimi,” which involved the participation of trade unions.
                       63   Gramsci recalls an impressive episode that took place in 1917 in Turin:
                            “When in July of 1917 the mission to Western Europe of the Petrograd
                            Soviet arrived in Turin, the delegates Smirnov and Goldemberg, who
                            presented themselves before a crowd of fifty thousand workers, were
                            greeted with deafening cries of ‘Long live Lenin! Long live the Bolsheviks!’”
                            (Gramsci [1921], https://www.marxists.org/archive/gramsci/1921/03/turin
                            _councils.htm).



                     Chapter Two

                        1   I owe the term “reconstructionists” to P. B. Johnson, who uses it in his fas-
                            cinating 1968 study, Land Fit for Heroes, on social reform after World War I
                            (see Johnson 1968, 220).
                        2   A century later this line of thinking has seen a resurgence in popularity in
                            “modern monetary theory” and its related thinking about the relation of
                            the state to the economy. See for example, Taylor (2019) and Kelton (2020).
                        3   Ministry of Reconstruction (1918, 28–29). Hall’s words were then partially
                            reprinted in Ministry of Reconstruction (1919, 6–7).
                        4   Filippo Vassalli, Genoa University, inauguration of the academic year 1919–
                            1920, republished in Pavan (2016, 180).
                        5   Regarding the Italian case, Ilaria Pavan stresses that the years 1917–1919
                            represented “the real starting point” in which the welfare state was born
                            (see Pavan 2019, 835).
                        6   Amongst the most notable reforms of the Liberal government (1905–1915)
                            we have the Education Acts of 1906–1907, which enabled local authori-
                            ties to provide subsidized school meals and required medical inspections
                            for school children. In 1908 old-age pensions were granted on a non-
                            contributory, means-tested basis. The National Insurance Act of 1911 was
                            by far the most important achievement: it provided for state-supervised
                            contributory insurance schemes against ill health for wage earners, and
                            against unemployment for some trades that were more subject to fluctua-
                            tions in the trade cycle. For a more detailed survey of the welfare measures
                            at the beginning of the century see Peden (1985, 16–35) and Thane (1996,
                            49–94).
                        7   As the War Cabinet stressed: “Welfare work, as now understood, was little
                            known in British industry before the war” (His Majesty’s Stationery Office
                            [hereafter HMSO] 1919a, 289).



                     330




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   330        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                   notes to pages 56–59


                        8   Haldane to Escher, December 26, 1918, Haldane papers, folder 103, in John-
                            son (1968, 245).
                        9   “Mr. Lloyd George on his Task,” The Times, November 25, 1918, 13. In that
                            same speech Lloyd George remarked: “Slums are not fit homes for the men
                            who have won this war or for their children . . . therefore the housing of the
                            people must be a national concern.”
                       10   Jason [pseud.] 1918, 5–6. Hammond detailed that before the war “the whole
                            life of a nation was to be subordinated to this imperious demand [of the
                            production of wealth] . . . consequently, the most terrible conditions were
                            tolerated as the alternative to the loss of trade. Children became hereditary
                            factory slaves, towns grew up in hideous form, and men and women were
                            reduced to the utmost degradation, and the triumphs of our industry all
                            over the globe left the great mass of our working population less free than
                            the inhabitants of a Red Indian village. This conceptual value and purpose
                            in national life did not satisfy everybody, but it satisfied the ruling class as a
                            whole” (ibid.).
                       11   See Addison’s biography, Morgan and Morgan (1980).
                       12   Cabinet memorandum, February 25, 1919, GT 6887, Cab 2; reprinted in
                            Clyne (1970, 169).
                       13   Lloyd George had made explicit that “a vigorous community, strong,
                            healthy men and women, is more valuable even from the commercial and
                            industrial point of view than a community below par in consequence of
                            bad conditions—treated if you like not as a human proposition, but as a
                            business proposition” (“Mr. Lloyd George on his Task,” The Times, Novem-
                            ber 25, 1918, 13).
                       14   The Whitley Councils (see chapter 1) well embodied their reconstructionist
                            industrial principles. They provided the institutional grounds for a “better
                            spirit” (HMSO 1919b, 152) whereby class antagonism could be replaced with
                            “the cooperation of all classes” in “the interest of the community” (Minis-
                            try of Labour 1917, 9). The 1918 British legislation that prohibited wage cuts
                            for a period of six months after the armistice in order to avoid the worst
                            consequences of war demobilization and the resulting surge in labor supply
                            was an important component of the reconstructionist industrial scheme.
                       15   For a good survey of the struggle of Italian workers’ organizations to
                            achieve global welfare coverage before and during the war, see Rigola (1918)
                            and Cherubini (1977, 236–54).
                       16   Both countries provided for war pensions and family allowances to
                            soldiers. Furthermore, as already mentioned in chapter 1, the need to
                            maintain a high level of productivity in the labor force informed a complex
                            apparatus of factory welfare services. The state established industrial can-
                            teens, health centers, and drinking facilities as well as better sanitary and
                            washing facilities (HMSO 1919b, 285–98). In this way the state shouldered
                            much of the cost of the social reproduction of the labor force. On the



                                                                                                          331




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   331        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.               6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 59–62


                            war welfare measures in Italy see Procacci (2013) and Pavan (2016). On
                            war welfare measures in Britain see Pedersen (1993, 79–133) and Pedersen
                            (1990). Pedersen stresses the gendered logic behind the British welfare
                            system and its long-term impact on British postwar society.
                       17   Once the ministry was born under the direction of Leonida Bissolati, it
                            “controlled all forms of assistance benefiting all those affected by the war”
                            (Ministero per l’Assistenza Militare 1919, 28), thus adopting a framework
                            that was labeled “proto-universalist” (Pavan 2019, 840). It is interesting
                            to note the progressive spirit of this form of welfare, whereby cohabiting
                            partners had the same rights as a spouse. This was the case also for the free
                            state-sponsored life insurance designated for soldiers that allowed partners,
                            illegitimate children, or even “old friends” to be named as beneficiaries
                            in the event of the bearer’s death. In the words of Nitti, of the Ministry of
                            Treasury: “Every soldier in the trenches, on the front lines, or in any part
                            of our land is entitled to write in the name of someone dear to him, be it
                            a brother, wife or lover, mother or illegitimate child, or an old friend, or a
                            far-off person who in some way is close to his heart, and he may do as he
                            likes with the sum that the state puts at the disposal of its combatants” (in
                            Pavan 2019, 843).
                       18   As Tommaso Tittoni, president of the Italian Senate at the time, put it,
                            “In the grave riots that have exploded in various parts of Italy, I was
                            impressed by the fact that, to muster sufficient forces to face the storm, it
                            was necessary to send for Carabinieri and police from other districts that
                            thus remained unprotected. I have often wondered what the government
                            would have done if revolt had broken out simultaneously throughout the
                            peninsula” (Tittoni 1930, 278–79—in Tasca 1965, 27).
                       19   The Chambers of Labour, founded at the end of the nineteenth century,
                            were a territorially based labor organization that regrouped the members
                            of the various unions.
                       20   Nitti, in Pavan (2019, 846). Originally: “nelle trincee e sui campi” “pieno
                            diritto di cittadinanza.” In Atti Parlamentari, Camera dei Deputati, XXIV
                            Legislatura, speech of October 20, 1917, 14792.
                       21   Letter written to Nitti by Vittorio Cottafavi, MP (senator from 1924),
                            exponent of the Liberal Constitutional group and a member of the rich
                            property-owning class of the modenese region (ACS, Presidenza del Consi-
                            glio dei Ministri, 1920, fol. 6.2.690, in Pavan 2016, 186).
                       22   The functions of the Ministry of Reconstruction, which began operations
                            in August 1917, were defined as follows: “To consider and advise upon the
                            problems which: may arise out of the present war and may have to be dealt
                            with upon its termination, and for the purposes aforesaid to institute and
                            conduct such enquiries, prepare such schemes, and make such recommen-
                            dations as he thinks fit” (HMSO 1918a, 202). The department was divided




                     332




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   332        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 62–65


                            into branches dealing respectively with commerce and production (includ-
                            ing the supply of materials); with finance, shipping, and common services;
                            with labor and industrial organization; with rural development; with the
                            machinery of government, central and local, health, and education; and
                            with housing and internal transport.
                       23   Major L-Col David Morgan, HC Deb 7 April 1919, vol. 114, cc 1756. Here-
                            after parliamentary debates will be cited by speaker’s name, House (HC or
                            HL), date, and location (e.g., cc 1756).
                       24   “There are in this country at the present time at least 70,000 houses quite
                            unfit for habitation, and a further 300,000 which are seriously defec-
                            tive. . . . There are about 3,000,000 people living in overcrowded condi-
                            tions, i.e., more than two in a room, and in the area covered by the London
                            County Council, their return showed 758,000 living under these dreadful
                            conditions” (Clarke 1920, 234). Bad housing was understood as the primary
                            cause of infant mortality, which was hitting the working classes almost four
                            times more than the middle and upper classes (John Davison, HC Deb
                            7 April 1919, vol. 114, cc 1746). Infectious diseases like tuberculosis were
                            endemic and their spread unstoppable when “In the vast majority of cases
                            not only were one or more persons sleeping in the same bed, but there
                            were other beds in the same room, in some instances four other beds in the
                            same room” (Dr. Addison, HC Deb 7 April 1919, vol. 114, cc 1715).
                       25   The Housing Act granted local authorities the power to acquire land and
                            houses, and was intended to overcome private enterprise, deemed “dead
                            as far as building houses for the working classes is concerned” (Ernest
                            Pretyman, HC Deb 7 April 1919, vol. 114, cc 1772), in favor of “bringing
                            the action of the State and of the public utility societies to bear.” Public
                            utility societies included “the co-operative building societies and the other
                            societies which work for a strictly limited dividend and not for speculative
                            building” (Captain William Ormsby-Gore, HC Deb 7 April 1919, vol. 114,
                            cc 1800). As we will explore in detail in the next chapter, under these
                            reforms the building guilds were given the chance to prosper. This first Act
                            was soon bolstered by the Housing (additional powers) Act of December
                            1919 (known as the Addison Act from the name of the minister of health),
                            which extended the power of the newly created minister of health to aid
                            local authorities to undertake housing enterprises.
                       26   The Women’s Cooperative Guild gained a large representation in the local
                            maternity committees that flourished after the Maternal and Infant Welfare
                            Act of 1918 discussed in chapter 1.
                       27   That same year, the cabinet agreed to a substantial increase in old-age
                            pensions in order to cope with the deplorable problem of poverty among
                            the elderly. The new measures endorsed the recommendations of the 1919
                            Ryland Adkins Committee, such as a doubling of the pension to 10s. per




                                                                                                     333




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   333        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 65–67


                            week. Various conditions and qualifications were relaxed in favor of ap-
                            plicants. Income limits were increased, with the effect that around 220,000
                            additional pensioners came onto the books (see Macnicol 2002).
                       28   See Peden (1985, 51) and HMSO (1919a, 296).
                       29   Ministry of Reconstruction 1919b, Cmd. 321, 5. This public education drive
                            was a true revolution. In 1917 Viscount Richard Haldane attested: “when I
                            was in charge of the War office, I found that a surprising number of recruits
                            could not read or write” (Haldane, “National Education,” p. 85, included in
                            Dawson 1917).
                       30   The declarations of the committee read: “Adult education will clearly thrive
                            only under conditions which allow of the fullest self-determination on
                            the part of the students as regards the studies to be pursued, the choice
                            of the teacher, and the organisation of the class. Our proposals, therefore,
                            are framed with a view to ensuring the maximum liberty to students
                            and establishing the right relation between the students, the teachers
                            and the bodies providing education—a relation which should be one of
                            co-operation” (Ministry of Reconstruction 1919, Cmd. 321, 168). The same
                            report remarked that “study and discussion grow more easily among
                            groups of students who have considerable freedom in organising educa-
                            tion for themselves and who are assisted to experiment on their own lines
                            rather than bound to follow any prescribed system” (ibid., 117). Great stress
                            was put on denying any “censorship” or interference “with the freedom
                            of the students to work out the type of education which suits them best”
                            (ibid., 118). Most importantly, “The State should not . . . refuse financial
                            support to institutions, colleges and classes, merely on the ground that they
                            have a particular ‘atmosphere’ or appeal specially to students of this type or
                            that. All that it ought to ask is that they be concerned with serious study”
                            (ibid., 118).
                       31   Regarding the popular education movement, the committee reports: “The
                            movement, in short, is neither esoteric nor superficial, neither the foible
                            of a few select individuals nor the evanescent fashion of a moment. It is a
                            natural development which has its roots deep in popular needs, and which
                            falls into its place as a logical stage in the development of education in
                            Great Britain” (Ministry of Reconstruction 1919, Cmd. 321, 36).
                       32   The explicit auspice was: “that their work, now necessarily sporadic and
                            disconnected, may be developed and find its proper place in the national
                            educational system” (Ministry of Reconstruction 1919, Cmd. 321, 5).
                       33   Ministry and Transport Act of 1919, https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/
                            Geo5/9-10/50/contents/enacted.
                       34   The underlying principle of the bill was to bring under one minister and
                            one department the functions connected with health “which are at the
                            present moment scattered among at least half-a-dozen Departments in




                     334




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   334        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                 notes to pages 67–69


                            Whitehall” (Major Astor, HC Deb 26 February 1919, vol. 112, cc 1910). The
                            parliamentary secretary to the local government board, Major Waldorf
                            Astor, used an evocative military metaphor: “to use in the great fight
                            against the disease the same principle which has enabled us to defeat the
                            other enemy on the Continent. That is to say, we want unified command,
                            one staff to look ahead, plan a campaign, and then carry it out” (ibid.,
                            Major Astor, cc 1909).
                       35   In the words of another MP: “This Bill is an urgent public necessity and
                            as it is conceived in a bold, comprehensive spirit, I feel sure that when its
                            principles are carried into effect it will have the result, not only of improv-
                            ing the general health of the community, but of adding very considerably
                            to the comfort of the people themselves” (ibid., L. Colonel Nathan Raw,
                            cc 1896).
                       36   The Socialist Party conference of October 1916 in Rome drew up a plan
                            for universal and mandatory social insurance for illness, invalidity, and
                            old age. Less than a year later the national council of CGdL unanimously
                            pushed for an extension of insurance to safeguard maternity and protect
                            against work accidents and poverty (Cherubini 1977, 225ff.).
                       37   The system was funded by joint contributions from workers, employers,
                            and the state, with considerable aid from municipalities and local charities,
                            which increased their function and financial autonomy.
                       38   Cermenati was adamant that “The worker’s right to social assistance, in
                            all cases, is guaranteed. His old age is safe from penury and indigence, he
                            can be certain to receive proper support in times of involuntary unem-
                            ployment, and soon enough, there will also be provisions for what most
                            concerns the working classes, that is, aid in the event of illness” (Minutes of
                            the Consiglio Superiore della Previdenza e delle Assicurazioni, meeting of
                            December 2, 1919, in INPS, 1962, 352, quoted from Pavan 2019, 851).
                       39   Reforms of mandatory insurance against accidents and insurance for old
                            age and invalidity (Regent’s Law Decree 670, April 29, 1917, in GU 184
                            [August 4, 1917], 3497) had already been crafted during the war, and found
                            more far-reaching explication during the postwar years.
                       40   Regent’s Law Decree 603, April 21, 1919, in GU 104 (May 1, 1919). Local
                            administrators had an extensive role in exercising these welfare objectives
                            (see De Stefani 1926a, 388–91).
                       41   For details see Bartocci (1999, 226). See also Cherubini (1977, 194–211).
                            Cherubini’s book is particularly illuminating as regards the class struggle
                            that unfolded around these reforms.
                       42   Pavan (2019, 848); ACS, Presidenza del Consiglio dei Ministri 1918,
                            fol. 5.1.607.
                       43   Note that it did not include domestic workers, civil servants, or those who
                            worked from home. The insurance was based on subsidies from workers




                                                                                                       335




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   335        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 69–71


                            and employers with a substantial annual state contribution. For details see
                            “Decree no. 2214 of October 19, 1919” in Pavan (2019, 859–60) and Cheru-
                            bini (1977, 218–24).
                       44   In 1920 the Unemployment Insurance Act extended the 1911 scheme to
                            cover most industrial workers. It expanded coverage “from 2-3 million in
                            1912 to over 12 million” people (Peden 2000, 168). After the summer of
                            1920, when unemployment in Britain tripled in just a few months, recon-
                            structionists pushed for many proto-Keynesian proposals of loan-financed
                            public works to keep people in jobs; in their means and objectives these
                            projects deeply contrasted with prewar budgetary orthodoxy (see chap-
                            ters 3 and 6).
                       45   The ministry was in charge of i) the supervision on the part of the Cassa
                            Nazionale of insurance against work accidents, ii) the application of the law
                            on mandatory insurance against disability and old age, and iii) collection
                            of labor statistics and coordination of the office of employment exchanges
                            [l’Ufficio nazionale per il collocamento e la disoccupazione] established in
                            October 1919. The first minister of labour, Mario Abbiate, was a progressive
                            Liberal, known for his devotion to the problems of labor and his important
                            enquiries on workers’ labor conditions. Under his purview the protection
                            of workers’ welfare became a legal prerogative.
                       46   In Marucco (2008, 181), originally in ACS, Atti Parlamentari [AP] Camera,
                            Leg. XXI, la sessione, Discussioni, 2a tornata del 15 maggio 1901, 3867.
                       47   Marucco (2008, 183), originally in ACS, AP Camera, Leg. XXIII, 1a ses-
                            sione, Discussioni, tornata del 12 maggio 1910, 6789.
                       48   On Nitti’s productivist reformism see Barbagallo (1984, 119–26).
                       49   This function of social control of welfare is especially important in times
                            of economic downturn when the labor force is separated from its primary
                            system of control (that is, the labor market). The idea is that welfare inhib-
                            its workers’ inclination to break with the system as they still have some-
                            thing to lose.
                       50   The radicalization of the moment in Italy was also expressed in the radical
                            behavior of the CGdL (traditionally reformist), which, on July 15, 1920, was
                            signing a pact in Moscow “for the triumphs of social revolution and of the
                            universal republic of the Soviet” (see Tasca 1965, 124).
                       51   Benito Mussolini, “The Crisis of Their Authority” [la crisi della loro auto-
                            rità], Il popolo d’Italia, July 29, 1920.
                       52   In Marucco (2008, 186), originally in ACS, AP Camera, Leg. XXVI,
                            sess. 1921, Documenti, n. 2, Relazione della commissione parlamentare
                            d’inchiesta sull’ordinamento delle amministrazioni di Stato e sulle condi-
                            zioni del personale, presentata il 18 gennaio 1921, 260.
                       53   The Ministry of National Economy—already responsible for a wide array
                            of functions—also took on the main responsibilities of the abolished Min-
                            istry of Labour. This was a clear regression to the prewar situation where



                     336




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   336        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                  notes to pages 75–76


                            the problems of labor were in the hands of the Ministry of Agriculture,
                            Industry, and Commerce. For the history of the Ministry of Labour see
                            Marucco (2008).



                     Chapter Three

                        1   Cole had used very similar words: “[A]fter the fall of the Habsburgs, the
                            Hohenzollerns and the Romanoffs, after the coming of Soviet Russia, and
                            for a time, of Soviet Hungary, who, whatever his attitude towards these
                            things, will dare to affirm that revolutionary social changes are impossible
                            in his own country? Who will hold an untarnished faith in the permanence
                            and inviolability of the old order?” (Cole 1920a, 9) or, “the control of Capi-
                            talism over Labour is breaking down” (ibid., 20).
                        2   In Britain, a proportion of women over thirty years of age was also enfran-
                            chised. More specifically, women over thirty who either occupied property
                            of no less than five pounds yearly value or were married to a man similarly
                            entitled. Section IV of the Act read: “A woman shall be entitled to be regis-
                            tered as a parliamentary elector for a constituency (other than a university
                            constituency) if she—(a) has attained the age of thirty years; and (b) is not
                            subject to any legal incapacity; and (c) is entitled to be registered as a local
                            government elector in respect of the occupation in that constituency of
                            land or premises (not being a dwelling-house) of a yearly value of not less
                            than five pounds or of a dwelling-house, or is the wife of a husband entitled
                            to be so registered” (Terry 1918, 14). On the subject see Terry (1918) and
                            McKibbin (1990, 66–101).
                        3   Historians debate about the nature of the socialist ideology of the Labour
                            Party, expressed in the famous clause IV of the 1918 constitution printed
                            in Labour and the New Social Order. The clause committed the party “to
                            secure to the workers by hand and by brain the full fruits of their industry
                            and the most equitable distribution thereof that may be possible, upon the
                            basis of the common ownership of the means of production and the best
                            obtainable system of popular administration and control of each industry
                            and service.” Most scholars tend to agree with Cole (1958) and Miliband
                            (1961), who understand the constitution as a Fabian blueprint that was gen-
                            eral enough to attract union consensus. While it did not propose to abolish
                            private property in toto, it did call for the nationalization of land and much
                            of the strategic industries together with radical social measures. Thus “even
                            though the implementation of the Labour’s programme would not have
                            ushered in a socialist society, it would have made a vast difference to the
                            character and texture of the old one” (Miliband 1961, 62). McKibbin (1974)
                            brings this pragmatic reading of clause IV further, arguing that rather than
                            an ideological conversion it was a matter of sensitivity to the structural



                                                                                                        337




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   337        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 76–77


                            changes brought about by World War I. In this sense the socialist objec-
                            tive was primarily a response to the fear of bolshevism and the need for a
                            powerful parliamentary and socialist alternative. It was also a measure that
                            allowed Labour to establish a break with the Liberal Party and to attract
                            the professional middle classes who had matured socialist tendencies (see
                            McKibbin 1974, 95–97).
                        4   The Italian Popular Party (or the People’s Party) was founded on January 18,
                            1919, by Luigi Sturzo, a Sicilian Catholic priest. It was inspired by Catholic
                            ideas of social justice and pushed for redistributive social reforms and
                            women’s suffrage. On its origins and agenda see Invernizzi-Accetti (2019).
                            Its activities died out in 1926 once the Fascist dictatorship took full control.
                        5   The socialist party won the administrative elections with the following
                            manifesto: “The comuni cannot be conquered but with the objective of
                            seizing them and paralyzing all powers, all mechanisms of the bourgeois
                            state with the objective of accelerating the proletarian revolution and the
                            establishment of a dictatorship of the proletariat” (in Tasca 1965, 204).
                        6   At the Socialist Party congress of Bologna in October 1919, the “maximal-
                            ist” current affirmed its victory over the reformist current and joined the
                            Third International. The radicalization of the Italian Socialist Party had
                            begun after the defeat of Caporetto in fall 1917 (when the “Intransigent
                            Revolutionary fraction” of the Socialist Party was born). The revolutionary
                            line gained the majority in the official meetings in Florence in November
                            1917 and dominated the party for many years afterward. In 1919 the reform-
                            ist agenda was defeated in favor of the most maximalist program in all
                            main local party elections [congresso provinciale]. Even in Milan, homeland
                            of the reformist tradition, the intransigent faction won the March 1919
                            elections for the directive council hands down. The sprouting of many
                            revolutionary local newspapers mirrors this radicalizing trend. In Naples,
                            Amadeo Bordiga, the future communist leader, founded the weekly maga-
                            zine Soviet. In Florence, La Difesa, the weekly of the Socialist federations,
                            was a champion of most extreme lines.
                        7   The leaders of CGdL were reformist members of the socialist party. The
                            pact of allegiance of 1918 reaffirmed the decisions of 1907 (CGdL was
                            founded in 1906), which assigned leadership of “political” strikes to the
                            “party” and “economic” strikes to the CGdL. Ludovico D’Aragona, the
                            leader, laid out the plan in January 1919: it included “highly progressive
                            taxation,” “cultivation of land and execution of public works by workers
                            united in cooperatives in the interest of collectivity,” and the “right of work-
                            ers to control factory management” and “the whole fruit of labor to whom
                            produces it.” The plan also included “global insurance against unemploy-
                            ment, work accidents, illness, and old age” (in Nenni 1946, 13). Over half of
                            the CGdL members were industrial workers; more specifically, they were
                            distributed in the following way: 200,000 construction workers, 160,000



                     338




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   338        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 77–79


                            metal workers, 155,000 textile workers, 68,000 in the gas industry, 60,000
                            state employees, 50,000 in chemicals, 50,000 private employees, 30,000
                            woodworkers, 25,000 railway workers, 23,000 leather workers, 22,400
                            workers in the building crafts, 22,000 tramway men, and 21,000 paper
                            workers. CGdL also organized 890,000 agricultural workers.
                        8   In Britain, for example, among women workers, the growth of unionization
                            was on the order of 130 percent between 1914 and 1920 (Burgess 1980, 165).
                            In the metallurgical sector the major craft unions grew by 76 percent be-
                            tween 1914 and 1918. On the other hand, the two largest trade unions of less
                            skilled workers organizing in the industry—the National Union of General
                            Workers (NUGW) and the Workers’ Union (WU)—grew by 216 percent
                            and 137 percent respectively (Hinton 1973, 49–50).
                        9   The source of these figures is Dataset 1: Labour disputes annual estimates,
                            UK, 1891 to 2018; Office of National Statistics (ONS).
                       10   Memorandum on The Causes of and Remedies for Labour Unrest, Presented
                            by the Trade Union Representatives on the Joint Committee Appointed at the
                            National Industrial Conference (held at the Central Hall, London, Febru-
                            ary 27, 1919). Reprinted in Cole (1920a, 247).
                       11   On the police strikes, see Critchley (1978) and Morgan (1987). Regarding
                            the unrest in the armed forces, the general revolutionary scare, and the
                            reaction of Lloyd George to labor unrest, see Wrigley (1991).
                       12   Coercive powers of the state were also mobilized in full during the 40-hour
                            strike on Clydeside in January–February 1919. On the government’s mili-
                            tary response against British workers see, among others, Morgan (1987).
                       13   The number of working days lost in a year is calculated by multiplying the
                            total number of working days lost due to strikes by the number of workers
                            involved. See Ministero dell’Economia Nazionale (1924), Supplemento
                            38, “Bollettino del lavoro e della previdenza Sociali,” page 15 for industrial
                            strike data and page 278 for agricultural strike data.
                       14   Note that this number does not include the 450,000 occupying workers
                            and the 6 million days of lost work during the factory occupation between
                            August 30 and September 20, 1920—an episode we will explore at length in
                            chapter 4. Zamagni documents that in Italy the level of mobilization during
                            the red biennium was “really exceptional” with respect to other coun-
                            tries: industrial disputes involved 30 percent of the labor force, while the
                            percentage in other countries was around 20 percent (see Zamagni 1991,
                            151–52). For strike data see chapter 9 of this book, figures 9.5 and 9.6.
                       15   See Ministero dell’Economia Nazionale (1924, 177), Supplemento 38, “Bol-
                            lettino del lavoro e della previdenza Sociali.” Metalworkers accounted for
                            the lion’s share: in March 1920, the metalworkers had 70,270 strikers with
                            1,448,209 days lost (ibid., 176). During the whole of 1919, almost 400,000
                            striking metalworkers contributed to a loss of over 11 million working days
                            (ibid., 154). However, the workers who carried out these strikes came from



                                                                                                      339




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   339        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 79–82


                            all social categories, even those traditionally distant from direct action,
                            including priests, schoolteachers, and judges.
                       16   In 1919 the textile industry had the highest percentage of strikes of all, even
                            more than metalworkers (18 percent, compared to 12 percent for metal-
                            worker strikes). Gender distribution in the other industrial strikes in 1919
                            were as follows: in chocolate factories, 386 men to 1,106 women; shoe facto-
                            ries, 38 men to 9018 women; leather factories, 8 men to 330 women; button
                            factories, 1,189 men to 2,446 women; tobacco, 83 men to 263 women.
                            Source: Ministero dell’Economia Nazionale (1924, 156–82).
                       17   Data from that time show that in 1919 and 1920 there was a surge of “wins”
                            over losses for the workers. See Ministero dell’ Economia Nazionale (1924,
                            28–29).
                       18   Real daily wages increased by 53 percent (see chapter 9, figure 9.7).
                       19   See Scholliers and Zamagni (1995, 258, Table A.23—Average Weekly Earn-
                            ings, Manual Workers, 1780–1960 [£s], Assuming Full Employment).
                       20   The struggle was widely popular throughout the British labor movement,
                            which launched a strong campaign for “hands off Russia.” Starting in Janu-
                            ary 1919 and covering the issue daily, Labour tried to convince the govern-
                            ment to withdraw troops from Russia. At the Labour Party conference of
                            June 1919, the speech of the chairman invoked the official stance of the La-
                            bour Party: “We must resist military operations in Russia”—(A Voice: “And
                            Ireland”)—“and the perpetuation of conscription at home. There can be no
                            peace so long as we continue to indulge in military adventures in Russia.
                            Russia must be left free to work out its own political salvation, and it would
                            be far better to send to the people the means to stabilise and consolidate
                            the democratic growth of the country than the means for one section to
                            destroy another or perhaps also the Revolution itself ” (Report of the Nine-
                            teenth Annual Conference of the Labour Party, June 25, 1919, 113, at https://
                            babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=msu.31293500351923&view=1up&seq=14&
                            skin=2021&q1=Russia20must20be20left20free20to20work). The
                            campaign was ultimately successful. On July 30, 1919, Churchill announced
                            that “our troops will be withdrawn from Russia before the winter” (Daily
                            Herald, July 30, 1919, 1). For details, see Macfarlane (1967, 126–52).
                       21   The memo on the causes and remedies of industrial unrest was drafted by
                            the trade union representatives on the occasion of the National Industrial
                            Conference of February 1919 (reprinted in Cole 1920a, 271). This enquiry
                            echoed in many respects the 1917 governmental enquiry.
                       22   In another passage Hodges gives a good idea of the revolutionary situation:
                            “We are confronted with an increasingly educated working class; a class
                            which more and more rejects the imposition of external will and author-
                            ity over it; a class which yearns for the status of responsible manhood in
                            industry and which rebels against any cramping institution which thwarts
                            its aspirations for freedom. The purpose of life is becoming more generally



                     340




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   340        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                 notes to pages 82–86


                            manifest as the enjoyment of freedom. For generations it has been believed
                            by the working classes that the only institution which stood in the way of
                            freedom was political in character. The freedom of political democracy is
                            a magnificent accomplishment, but it is now realized that the slavery of
                            industry is harsher than the slavery of the unfranchised serf. Hence the
                            impulse of industrial freedom. The struggle to shake off the imposition
                            of external wills because the instruments of production are owned by the
                            possessors of such wills is the most remarkable phenomenon of the age”
                            (Hodges 1920, ix–x).
                       23   The peasants were also granted recognition in the form of an elected
                            representative—a fiduciario—to oversee the correct application of the new
                            labor agreement and to form a council of fiduciari.
                       24   These demands for economic democracy were springing from diverse
                            industries: miners, railway men, construction workers, engineers, and
                            shipbuilders, as well as workers in the post office and the civil service.
                            For example, the NUR (National Union of Railwaymen) put forward an
                            articulate request for nationalization and joint control of the railway sys-
                            tem, while the union of post office workers drafted a very comprehensive
                            scheme for transforming the postal service into a self-governing service on
                            Guild socialist lines. For discussion of the Railway workers in connection
                            with decontrol, see Armitage (1969, 46–100).
                       25   The other half of the twelve-member commission consisted of three coal
                            owners (Evan Williams, R. W. Cooper, and J. T. Forgie) and three repre-
                            sentatives of industry (Arthur Balfour, Sir Eric Duckham, and Sir Tony
                            Royden). The first stage of the hearings concerning working wages and
                            hours occurred March 3–20, 1919; the second, regarding the broader issue
                            of nationalization, was concluded in June 1919.
                       26   It is interesting to note that this sentiment of condemnation of private
                            capital was also shared by the commissioners representing capital, such
                            as Sir Arthur Duckham, president of the Institution of Civil Engineers.
                            Duckham submitted his official final report in June, the first two points of
                            which read: “I. The private ownership of minerals has not been and is not
                            in the best interests of the community, II. The providing of the country’s
                            mineral resources should not be left to private enterprise” (Great Britain,
                            Royal Commission on the Coal Industry 1919b, xxii).
                       27   Between the first and the second stage, 163 witnesses were heard, compris-
                            ing a plurality of voices: miners’ wives, economics professors, civil servants,
                            engineers, secretaries of local miners’ federations, representatives of in-
                            dustry, colliery owners, etcetera (see Great Britain, Royal Industry on Coal
                            Industry Commission 1919a, xxiv; 1919b, xxix–xxxii).
                       28   William Straker, the secretary of the Northumberland Miners, commented
                            in his precis that “During the first stage of this Commission the old ways of
                            mine management and control were shown to be so beaten into mud, that



                                                                                                       341




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   341        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 86–88


                            the Report, known as the ‘Sankey Report,’ and accepted by the government,
                            declared that ‘the present system stands condemned’” (Great Britain, Royal
                            Commission on Coal Industry 1919b, 944).
                       29   Meticulously gathered firsthand evidence highlighted class division and so-
                            cial injustice: the miners’ disgraceful working and living conditions, which
                            were “in the majority of cases, nothing less than scandalous” (Great Britain,
                            Royal Commission on Coal Industry 1919a, xiv). The industry’s deadly
                            work accidents and decreases in real wages since 1914 were put side by side
                            with owners’ excessive profits, which had quadrupled during the war. “The
                            life standards, the homes, and the colliery conditions of men who give this
                            indispensable toil, afford the most crushing case against the continuance of
                            the present system” (Hodges 1920, v).
                       30   For example, in his deposition, Mr. William Straker denounced the antago-
                            nistic and individualistic vision of society as an outdated fixation that must
                            be overcome: “Those against nationalisation evidently hold that competi-
                            tion is the very soul of progress. Life, to them, is an antagonism, each
                            individual struggling for supremacy; and out of this struggle the fittest will
                            survive. This means that out of selfishness, scientifically applied, will come
                            the greatest good to the greatest number. This seems to me to be a primi-
                            tive idea belonging rather to an early form of society than to the 20th cen-
                            tury civilization. On the other hand, those in favour of nationalisation hold
                            just as strongly that life is not necessarily an antagonism, and that mutual
                            aid, applied scientifically, must give the best results. This is a conception
                            which mankind arrives at after getting away a considerable distance from
                            the primitive. Selfishness is the root cause of all wrongdoing; therefore any
                            system which is an outgrowth of selfishness must be wrong. That which
                            is morally wrong cannot be economically right. Systems based upon this
                            great truth ought to be encouraged, as such must produce a better citizen.
                            Systems based on the desire for selfish gain ought to be discouraged, as
                            making for all that is worst in individual and corporate life. That which
                            draws men together in co-operative activities makes for progress and
                            human welfare; that which keeps men in a hostile attitude one to another
                            wars against welfare and progress” (Arnot 1919, 29).
                       31   Divided ownership, it was pointed out, meant huge loss of coal used for
                            barriers, wasteful shaft development and unnecessary underground haul-
                            age, undue expense in draining and even the impossibility of a systematic
                            provision for drainage, inefficiency in marketing, extra expense in railway
                            wagonage, and so on. For an analysis of the technical and specific discus-
                            sion about coal see Sankey’s June 20 final report on the second stage of
                            the inquiry, in Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal Industry (1919b,
                            iv–xiii, v–viii) or Chiozza Money’s evidence in Arnot (1919, 25–27).
                       32   The call for radical economic democracy was already present in the 1912
                            syndicalist-inspired program The Miners’ Next Steps. The unrest in the pits



                     342




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   342        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                        notes to page 89


                            of 1919 also produced the pamphlet Industrial Democracy for the Miners: A
                            Plan for the Democratic Control of the Mining, published by the industrial
                            committee of the South Wales Socialist Society, which offered a detailed
                            scheme for the implementation of workers’ control. For details on these
                            rank-and-file movements see Ives (2016, 58–75).
                       33   Commissioners gave lengthy technical reports on the workings and eco-
                            nomic benefits of nationalization: the unification in production, in buying
                            and selling, in transport, and in distribution would result in enormous
                            economies and far greater efficiency in the coal mines, securing “a cheap
                            and adequate supply of coal” (Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal
                            Industry 1919b, vi). In his report, Sidney Webb summarizes the rationale
                            behind the experts’ view: “Nationalisation is called for (1) as the only
                            means of adequately improving the position of the miners with regard to
                            housing, accidents and special disease and infantile mortality; (2) as the
                            only means of dealing economically and efficiently with the nation’s coal
                            resources; and (3) as the only means of ensuring that the coal is supplied
                            to the consumers with regularity and at the lowest cost” (Great Britain,
                            Royal Commission on Coal Industry 1919b, 478). The potential merits
                            of nationalization were considered even by orthodox economists such
                            as A. C. Pigou. In his deposition to the commission in April 1919, Pigou
                            stated that “under full nationalization there are possibilities of results better
                            than any other plan can offer” (Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal
                            Industry 1919b, 417). Nationalization was thus understood as a guarantee of
                            efficiency and the common interest; it was going to benefit the nation, not
                            just the miners. As John R. Clynes, Labour MP, put it: “National ownership
                            is advocated not for a trade, or a class, or a sectional benefit. Gain for the
                            community inspires the demand made for immediate changes in both the
                            terms of service, and the conditions of ownership of this great property”
                            (Hodges 1920, iv).
                       34   Drafted by William Straker and officially submitted to the commission on
                            May 23, 1919.
                       35   Each report gave a different view of the managerial weight of the work-
                            ers in the production process. Sankey’s scheme put the minister of mines
                            (responsible to Parliament) in supreme control, with the obligation to
                            consult the National Mining Council on “all questions connected with the
                            operation and management of industry.” On the other hand, the miners’
                            scheme understood the National Mining Council itself—the minister of
                            mines being a member—as the supreme authority. In this scheme, half
                            of the Mining Council was composed of members elected in Parliament
                            (including technicians, experts, and managerial workers), and the other
                            half was elected by the workers. The Council would engage in all activities
                            of production, distribution, and export of coal (Miners Bill, reprinted in
                            Arnot 1919, 37–47). In July 1919, even with some reservations regarding the



                                                                                                         343




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   343        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 89–95


                            supposedly limited degree of workers’ representation, miners’ representa-
                            tives decided to endorse Sankey’s proposals to send a strong message to the
                            government.
                       36   “Subject to a general superintendence, and the necessity of making the
                            industry self-supporting, they [mining councils] may pursue their own
                            policies with a free hand and a free purse. Their finances are to be kept
                            ‘entirely separate’ from one another” (Henderson 1919, 266). Importantly
                            for our story, financial independence from the Treasury was envisaged:
                            “The Treasury shall not be entitled to interfere with or to have any control
                            over the appropriation of moneys derived from the industry. The said mon-
                            eys shall be kept entirely separate and apart from other national moneys,
                            until the profit accruing from the industry is periodically ascertained and
                            paid into the Exchequer” (Report by The Honourable Mr. Justice Sankey,
                            G. B. E. [Chairman]. In Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal Industry
                            1919b, xi).
                       37   The Times, for example, published the reports in full. See “State Coal,” The
                            Times, June 23, 1919, 19–20.
                       38   The connection between monetary austerity and unemployment was clear
                            in the minds of Treasury officials such as Ralph Hawtrey, who on multiple
                            occasions affirmed that “it was true that unemployment was due to a con-
                            traction of the supply of the means of payment.” For details, see chapter 6.
                       39   Viglongo (1920, 75–76).
                       40   Ibid., 76.
                       41   Workers were paid for their labor. The surplus was divided between the
                            reserve fund and payment for the different shares of workers’ capital as
                            well as for any extra labor. These cooperatives were by law “open,” that is,
                            they had “to admit members limitlessly keeping in mind the development
                            capacity of the cooperative.” This meant acceptance until there was labor
                            for its members (see Buffetti 1921, 85–86).
                       42   See Ministero per il Lavoro e la Previdenza Sociale (1923, 218–31).
                       43   The president was in charge for two years; councillors served for two years,
                            half of the four (or more) of them being up for election each year. See the
                            template of the co-op statute in Buffetti (1921, 43–54).
                       44   Like the Sankey proposals for miners’ joint control, the guilds too were
                            organized nationally in a three-tier structure. The guild committee func-
                            tioned as the board of directors. The district or local guild committee was
                            the core of the guild network. It comprised at most two representatives of
                            each craft so as to assure an equal voice in the activities and transactions of
                            the guild. These representatives served for one year, were subject to recall,
                            and were eligible for reelection. In July 1921, the national conference of
                            district guild committees adopted a constitution for a national building
                            guild, envisaging, in addition to the local level, also regional councils and a
                            national board.



                     344




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   344        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 97–101


                       45   During the period from October 1920 to March 1922, the London guilds
                            “lost an average of 4.7 days per man through sickness, about half the num-
                            ber lost each year by uninsured workers in the United States, about half
                            the number lost in 1915 by insured workers in Germany, and about half the
                            number lost in 1913 by insured workers in Austria” (Joslyn 1922, 111).
                       46   At the same time, given the uncertainty of the business, the Cooperative
                            Wholesale Society (the second largest dealer in building materials after
                            the government, which provided initial capital and material) withdrew its
                            finances, leaving guilds without capital, which was ever more necessary
                            if they were now to build not for public but for private customers while
                            competing with private producers.
                       47   For details on the Geddes Axe see chapter 6.



                     Chapter Four

                        1   “Two Revolutions” [Due Rivoluzioni], L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 8 (July 3,
                            1920): 57.
                        2   Ibid. Gramsci envisaged the factory council as a first nucleus of a class-
                            less society: “The factory council must be formed according to the
                            principle of organization by industry; it must represent for the working
                            class the model of communist society, at which it will arrive through the
                            dictatorship of the proletariat; in this society there will not exist divisions
                            of class, all social relations will be governed according to the technical re-
                            quirements of production and of the corresponding organization, and will
                            not be subordinated to an organized state power” (Gramsci 1921).
                        3   J. T. Murphy was considered the brain of the British Shop Steward Move-
                            ment. He was active in the Sheffield wing of the Shop Steward Movement,
                            which emerged in engineering factories during the war. In 1916 Murphy
                            joined the Socialist Labour Party and was one of the founding members
                            of the British Communist Party in 1920. For his memoir, see Murphy
                            (1941).
                        4   The movement remained faithful to its radical position, so that in January
                            1920 the national conference of shop stewards took a firm stance, offi-
                            cially declaring full control of industry to be its ultimate objective, while
                            repudiating joint control or any other bourgeois scheme: “This Conference,
                            while urging the rank and file of the working class movement to support
                            the miners or any other body of workers in their fight against the employ-
                            ing class, declares that the nationalization of any industry which leaves the
                            capitalist class in power will not emancipate the workers and calls on the
                            organized labour movement to strive for the confiscation of the mines,
                            railways and other means of production and distribution in the inter-
                            est of labour. Therefore the conference declares that all schemes of joint



                                                                                                       345




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   345        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 101–105


                            control, whether embodied in the Sankey Report, Whitley Report or any
                            other capitalist scheme, are detrimental to the best interests of the working
                            class and urges the workers to reorganize themselves for the purpose of
                            independently taking control of the industrial and social machinery in the
                            interests of the exploited masses” (The Worker, February 14, 1920, reprinted
                            in Pribićević 1959, 140).
                        5   This episode has been extensively documented by contemporaries from
                            Giolitti to Albertini, from Salvemini to Einaudi, Buozzi to Nenni, Gramsci,
                            Togliatti, Tasca, and Bordiga, and has been debated by historians.
                        6   US Department of Labor (1917, 9).
                        7   Prior to 1914 the elected shop stewards were few, had limited representa-
                            tive tasks and belonged mainly to skilled organizations. With the war a
                            new type of steward, unofficial (no longer appointed by trade unions, but
                            chosen by groups of workers in each establishment) and with considerably
                            wider powers, took the leadership in every industrial dispute within the
                            trade.
                        8   US Department of Labor (1917, 9).
                        9   Scholars have produced a few (yet detailed) studies expanding on the strike
                            actions and militancy of the various shop steward groups, especially on the
                            Clydeside, exploring their successes, their repression, and their political
                            weaknesses (see Gleason 1920, Kendall 1969, Hinton 1973, Pribićević 1959).
                       10   Antonio Gramsci (1891–1937) is to this day among the most influential
                            thinkers of the twentieth century. Born in Sardinia, he studied philosophy
                            at the University of Turin. He was an active and militant intellectual until
                            his imprisonment in 1926 by the Fascist regime. He spent the rest of his life
                            in prison, and died at the age of 46. The literature on Gramsci is extensive.
                            We only mention a few. On the evolving relation between Gramsci and the
                            Liberal tradition see Michelini (2011b). For a multifaceted reconstruction
                            of Gramsci’s biography and thought see Giasi (2007), which contains the
                            contributions of the conference of the Fondazione Istituto Gramsci on the
                            occasion of the author’s seventieth death anniversary. On a recent recon-
                            sideration of Gramsci’s philosophy in the Prison Notebooks see Thomas
                            (2009).
                       11   To give a sense of the city’s red spirit, one can note that the first issues
                            of the local edition of the Socialist L’Avanti in December 1918 started out
                            with 16,000 copies; in just a few months the local circulation had reached
                            50,000 (see Spriano 1971, 16–17).
                       12   Gramsci recalls the incident: “The insurrection exploded on 23 August 1917.
                            For five days the workers fought in the streets of the city. The insurgents,
                            armed with rifles, grenades and machine guns, managed to occupy some
                            quarters of the city and attempted three or four times to possess the city
                            centre where the government institutions and military commands were
                            located. . . . The people erected barricades, dug trenches, surrounded some



                     346




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   346        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 105–107


                            districts with barbed wire and electric current and held back for five days
                            all the attacks of the troops and the police. More than 500 workers fell,
                            more than 2000 were seriously injured. After the defeat the best elements
                            were arrested and deported and the proletarian movement lost revolution-
                            ary intensity. But the communist feelings of the Turin proletariat were not
                            extinguished” (Gramsci 1921). For a detailed description of the political
                            actions of those months, including all the rallies and meetings, see the
                            archival documents of the magistratura militare on the judiciary investiga-
                            tion reprinted in Zucaro (1960).
                       13   The internal commissions were grievance committees elected by union
                            members within the factory to handle everyday problems of discipline, ar-
                            bitration, etcetera. The project of the factory councils was to vastly extend
                            the internal commission’s competence and its level of inclusivity, elect fac-
                            tory commissars from among the workers who would then elect a factory
                            committee as the executive body of the factory council. In Gramsci’s words:
                            “Today, these commissions have the task of curbing the power the capitalist
                            exerts within the factory, and they perform an arbitration and disciplinary
                            function. In the future, developed and improved, they should be the organs
                            of proletarian power, replacing the capitalist in all his useful managerial
                            and administrative functions” (Gramsci with Palmiro Togliatti, “Workers’
                            Democracy” [Democrazia operaia], L’Ordine nuovo, June 21, 1919, I, n. 7,
                            47). The commissars’ duty was representing the workers against the capi-
                            talists, and crucially, “studying and pushing the other comrades to study
                            the bourgeois system of production.” Indeed, apart from the administra-
                            tive functions (which had also been proper to the internal commission),
                            the factory council was involved in “intense revolutionary preparation”
                            [intensa preparazione rivoluzionaria] and actively framed itself in the gen-
                            eral political action, aiming at the dictatorship of the proletariat (Assembly
                            of the factory commmisars of Turin, “The Programme of the Department
                            Commissars” [Il programma dei commissari di reparto], L’Ordine nuovo,
                            November 8, 1919, I, n. 25, 193).
                       14   “Discussion on the Factory Councils” [Discussioni sui Consigli di fabbrica],
                            L’Ordine nuovo, November 22, 1919, I, n. 27, 212, signed: a group of orga-
                            nized workers from Fiat Centro [firmato: Alcuni operai organizzati della
                            Fiat Centro].
                       15   Immediately after the war, Gramsci recounts, “The problems of the revolu-
                            tion, economic and political, formed the object of discussions in all the
                            workers’ assemblies” (Gramsci 1921).
                       16   Ibid.
                       17   Hamon (1919, I, n. 19, 145).
                       18   “Work Plan” [Programma di lavoro], L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 1 (May 1, 1919): 2.
                       19   See “Letters from England” [Lettere dall’Inghilterra], L’Ordine nuovo,
                            September 6, 1919, I, 17, 133; October 11, 1919, I, n. 21, 166; February 7, 1920,



                                                                                                         347




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   347        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 108–113


                            I, n. 36, 287; March 27, 1920, I, n. 42, 338; June 12, 1920, II, 5, 36; and July 17,
                            1920, II, n. 10, 80.
                       20   [lugubre scienza dei fatti economici] Togliatti 1919a, 71.
                       21   Gramsci, “Two Revolutions” [Due Rivoluzioni], L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 8
                            (July 3, 1920): 58, reprinted in Gramsci (1994, 171).
                       22   See for example Mankiw (1997).
                       23   This principle represented a big shift with respect to the war industrial
                            committees: no longer were the commissars picked by unions, who—as
                            the worker Arturo Jacchia remarked—“took care of picking the members
                            of the committee from the workers who were agreeable to the adminis-
                            tration.” Instead, “Today it is preferable that [the commissars] belong to
                            socialist organizations” (Jacchia 1919, I, n. 9, 66).
                       24   For a good critique of intellectualism, see Gramsci against Tasca in
                            Gramsci 1920a, I, n. 12, 95.
                       25   Gramsci 1920a, I, n. 12, 95. And again, in his Prison Notebooks he would
                            remember the journal as follows: “This editorial board was not abstract,
                            did not consist of repeating mechanically scientific or theoretical formu-
                            lae . . . it applied to real men, formed in specific historical relations, with
                            specific feelings, ways of life, fragments of conceptions of the world . . . this
                            element of ‘spontaneity’ was not neglected nor despised: it was educated
                            and directed” (Gramsci in Spriano 1971, 136).
                       26   Gramsci 1919a, I, n. 18, 140.
                       27   “Cultura e Socialismo,” L’Ordine nuovo, June 28–July 5, 1919, I, n. 8, 55–56.
                       28   The full “Second Thesis on Feuerbach” reads: “The question whether objec-
                            tive truth can be attributed to human thinking is not a question of theory
                            but is a practical question. Man must prove the truth—i.e., the reality and
                            power, the this-sidedness of his thinking in practice. The dispute over the
                            reality and non-reality of thinking that is isolated from practice is a purely
                            scholastic question.” See Marx and Engels ([1888] 1969, vol. 1, 13–15).
                       29   The metaphor of the school appears often in L’Ordine nuovo. For example,
                            the idea that the factory councils “are a school of life in which the new class
                            that will direct the destiny of humanity is educated and acquires respon-
                            sible consciousness” (“International Political Life, a Destruction and a
                            Genesis” [Vita politica internazionale, uno sfacelo ed una genesi], L’Ordine
                            nuovo 1, no. 1 [May 1, 1919]: 7).
                       30   “The Instrument of Labor” [Lo strumento di lavoro], L’Ordine nuovo 1,
                            no. 37 (February 14, 1920): 289.
                       31   Courses ranged from “Anarchy and the Theory of the State,” taught by
                            Angelo Tasca, to “Economics and Socialism,” taught by Togliatti, to a series
                            on the French Revolution, taught by Terracini. For a detailed description
                            of the school, see “The Program of the School of Socialist Propaganda” [Il
                            programma della scuola di propaganda], L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 28 (Novem-
                            ber 29, 1919): 216.



                     348




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   348        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                 6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 113–115


                       32   “The Programme of the Department Commissars” [Il programma dei com-
                            missari di reparto], L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 25 (November 8, 1919): 194.
                       33   Zini (1920, I, n. 38, 301–2). The shop stewards were thinking along the same
                            lines. Workers were “realizing that the right to vote for parliament, once
                            in five years, is of little value compared with the right to vote on the way
                            industry should be carried on” (Gallacher and Campbell 1972, 3). Murphy
                            suggested that for this reason economic emancipation held absolute politi-
                            cal priority: “Real democratic practice demands that every member of an
                            organization shall participate actively in the conduct of the business of the
                            society” (Murphy 1917, 8).
                       34   “The type of proletarian State is not the mendacious [menzognera] bour-
                            geois democracy, but the proletarian democracy; not parliamentarism,
                            but the self-government of the people (masse) through representative
                            institutions of their own” (untitled, L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 16 [October 2,
                            1920]: 124).
                       35   The revolutionary strategy of the Italian councils put at center stage the
                            connection between the economic and the political. The British movement,
                            which arose from a syndicalist tradition, initially lacked this insight as it
                            underestimated the role of the worker party. After 1920 many of the leaders
                            of the British movement realized the need for a party; many of the people
                            who founded the Communist Party of Britain in 1921 came from this
                            group of leaders (see Hinton 1973). On his end, as early as 1919 Gramsci
                            rebuked any accusation of syndicalism and of “economism.” To him,
                            political organization was intrinsic to the organization of the production
                            process through the councils (see Gramsci 1919c, I, n. 25, 191). Moreover,
                            for Gramsci and Togliatti the revolutionary breakthrough could be put
                            into motion at the level of the factory but required a central connection
                            with the political role of the party. The party had to be actively integrated
                            and transformed to be “rooted in the workplace, had to be inserted in the
                            ‘connective tissue’ of the factory.” Only through the tight interconnection
                            with the councils can both the unions and the party be transformed from
                            bureaucratic institutions that are distant from the proletarian masses into
                            institutions that can “involve actively and consciously the great proletarian
                            masses in the revolutionary process . . . a party that lives within the prole-
                            tarian masses that is its clear and definite consciousness and will” (Gramsci
                            1920b, I, n. 43, 340). Once actively integrated with the new proletarian or-
                            ganization of the councils, the party provided essential organizational lead-
                            ership. Coherently with the Leninist tradition, the Ordinovisti understood
                            the party as the vanguard for the seizure of political power, indispensable
                            to defeating the capitalist state.
                       36   The first general meeting of department commissars put forth some
                            guidelines but refused to formalize a “definitive program,” highlighting that




                                                                                                      349




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   349        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to page 115


                            it was to be seen as a “practical experiment”—one that would be “open to
                            continuous and radical innovation” (“The Programme of the Department
                            Commissars” [Il programma dei commissari di reparto], L’Ordine nuovo 1,
                            no. 25 [November 8, 1919] 193).
                       37   For example, see Murphy 1917; Gallacher and Paton 1918; Gallacher and
                            Campbell 1972; Dingley 1918, Walsh 1920; Pratt 1917. The central philosophy
                            was that “These committees should not have any governing power, but
                            should exist to render service to the rank and file, by providing means for
                            them to arrive at decisions and to unite their forces” (Murphy 1917, 10).
                       38   [Tutti i commissari hanno obbligo di indire frequenti referendum nei loro
                            reparti su questioni sociali e tecniche e tenere frequenti comizi] (“Programme
                            of the Department Commissars,” L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 25 [November 8,
                            1919]: 194). As for the workers’ representatives—the commissars—their
                            very daily experience escaped bureaucratic estrangement, since they lived
                            in immediate contact with the working masses and secured this connection
                            with a concentric set of commissions. Elections ran by closed ballot during
                            the working day, and the final counting of votes occurred immediately
                            and publicly. On the other hand, the “executive committee of the factory
                            council” [il comitato esecutivo del consiglio di officina] was elected by the
                            commissars as the “maximum organ of proletarian self-government” [mas-
                            simo organismo dell’autogoverno proletario] that held “executive mandate
                            within the factory and representative mandate in the councils’ assemblies.”
                            The executive committee of Fiat Centro had its long-term objectives clearly
                            laid out: “We will be able to build a gigantic octopus whose tentacles will
                            infiltrate in all the wrinkles of modern industrial life, embracing and
                            coordinating all the productive and revolutionary activities. We will in this
                            way be able to build a formidable instrument of struggle to direct for the
                            achievement of our ends and for the establishment of proletarian power”
                            (“The Opinion of the Executive Councils on the Workshop Committees” [il
                            parere del C.E. sui Consigli d’Officina], L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 42 [March 27,
                            1920]: 335).
                       39   “To the Department Commissars of the Fiat Centro and Brevetti Work-
                            shop” [Ai commissari di reparto delle officine Fiat Centro e Brevetti],
                            L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 18 (September 13, 1919): 140.
                       40   The National Advisory Council, founded in July 1919, represented the
                            metal industry at the national level and envisaged a national council with
                            the ultimate object of coordinating the movement of all the British work-
                            ers as one body. In 1921, faithful to the intention of uniting all rank-and-
                            file movements beyond metal workers, the movement did receive a new
                            constitution, changing its name from Worker Control and Shop Steward
                            Movement to National Workers’ Committee Movement (NWCM).
                       41   The socialist party of Turin wrote to invite peasants to participate in the
                            congress of workers’ councils of 1920, declaring: “Peasants, we invite you to



                     350




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   350        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 116–121


                            participate in the work of the congress of the factory commissars, because
                            you too are oppressed by the heavy capitalist order that the workers want
                            to sweep out” (“For the Congress of the Factory Councils, to the Industrial
                            Workers and Peasants of All Italy” [Per il Congresso dei Consigli di Fabbrica,
                            Agli operai e contadini di tutta Italia], L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 42 [March 27,
                            1920]: 331). According to Gramsci, the proletarian revolution would
                            solve the pernicious “southern question,” as the industrial workers would
                            break the chains of “capitalist slavery” and eliminate at once the coloniza-
                            tion of the south of Italy by the northern bourgeoisie.
                       42   Gramsci (1921).
                       43   Speech of Gino Olivetti to confindustria, reprinted in “The Opinion of
                            the Industrialists on the Factory Councils” [l’opinione degli industriali sui
                            Consigli di Fabbrica], L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 2 (May 15, 1920): 15.
                       44   L’Avanti, Piedmont edition (May 1, 1920), reprinted in Spriano (1971, 101).
                       45   The Turin section of the local socialist party, which had been left on its own
                            to confront the offensive of the repressive forces of the state, passed a mo-
                            tion (prepared by Gramsci) for the renovation of the socialist party and the
                            expulsion of the “nonrevolutionary communists.” It put at center stage the
                            role of leadership and coordination of a fully revolutionary party, grounded
                            in the factory and understood to be an expression of proletarian vanguard.
                            A couple of months later, at the second congress of the third international,
                            Lenin approved this motion, in both its criticism and its practical propos-
                            als, as fully responding to the principles of the third international. For the
                            isolation of L’Ordine nuovo and the immobilism of the CGdL and the PSI,
                            see Spriano (1971, 97–98).
                       46   Obstructionism was initiated in every engineering and metallurgical fac-
                            tory and every naval dockyard. In general, for a well-documented account
                            of the whole episode of the factory occupation, see Spriano 1975.
                       47   Santhià (1956, 120).
                       48   “Many working-class families had been without wages since the end of
                            August; their situation was getting desperate. . . . Urgent needs were met by
                            subsidies from the cooperatives, above all popular solidarity, in ‘communist
                            kitchens’ and a thousand gestures of aid and fraternity” (Spriano 1975, 83).
                       49   Testimony in Natoli (2017, 194).
                       50   Ibid.
                       51   See Rocca 1920, 221–52.
                       52   Anonymous editorial, “The Symbol and Reality” [Il simbolo e la realtà],
                            L’Avanti [Piedmont], September 3, 1920.
                       53   The representatives in Rome were: D’Aragona, Baldesi, and Colombino
                            for the CGdL; Marchiaro, Raineri, and Missiroli for FIOM; Conti, Crespi,
                            Olivetti, Falck, Ichino, and Pirelli for the confederation of industry.
                       54   The press used the word “capitulation” to describe the agreement, while
                            the majority of industrialists called it a diktat coming from the govern-



                                                                                                      351




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   351        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 122–126


                            ment and widely criticized their representatives at the conference (see ACS,
                            Ministero degli Interni, direzione generale di ps, affari generali e riservati,
                            D. 13, busta 74, n. 2958, in Spriano 1975, 195).
                       55   Missiroli 1924, 172, reprinted in Spriano 1975, 104.
                       56   [la vittoria dei metallurgici non ha l’eguale in tutta la storia del movimento
                            operaio internazionale]
                       57   Contemporaries as well as historians have endlessly debated on the con-
                            tentious issue of whether or not the summer of 1920 represented a “true”
                            revolutionary moment, and whether the objective conditions were pre-
                            empted by a weak subjective factor: the “lack of decisiveness” of the party
                            and the union. The complexity of the debate, which is bound not to find a
                            resolution, is beyond our investigation here. What is clear is that many in
                            the establishment were certain that a major blowup was near at hand. In
                            Luigi Einaudi’s words from 1933: “The situation would really have become
                            revolutionary if the leaders of the socialist movement had exploited the
                            revolt of the factory workers and moved to an assault on the regime”
                            (Einaudi 1933, 332).
                       58   ACS, Ministero degli Interni, direzione generale di ps, affari generali e
                            riservati, D. 13, busta 74, n. 2936, reprinted in Spriano (1975, 190).
                       59   La gazzetta del popolo, October 3, 1920, reprinted in Spriano (1975, 123).
                       60   Salvemini (1929, 22).
                       61   The manifesto of the Milan chamber of labor read: “Workers! Ours is a
                            truce. Don’t disarm, only demobilize, don’t let the distrust sap your spirit.
                            Our hour will come and it has to find us strong, ready for it all. We wait
                            because we can, we want, we have to win!” (L’Avanti, September 22, 1920).
                            In the following days L’Avanti used a tone of a revolutionary future: for
                            example, in L’Avanti of September 24, 1920 an article appeared titled “work-
                            ers, proceed united, for the new battles, for the certain victories!”
                       62   Gramsci repeated that the “factory councils have demonstrated to be the
                            revolutionary institution most historically vital for the proletarian class”
                            (Gramsci 1920c, 121). And in October he wrote: “the Italian proletariat
                            can be determining for the world revolution” (“The political week, inter-
                            national discipline” [La settimana politica, la disciplina internazionale],
                            L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 18 [October 16, 1920]: 138).
                       63   The engineer Pietro Borghi agreed: “in substance the experience of the
                            past September was excellent” (Seassaro 1920, 134) and now it was all
                            about reaping its fruits for future action. Fiat employee Mario Stagiotti also
                            noted: “They had to prepare for the decisive moment . . . everything will
                            have to fall in front of the formidable force” (in Spriano 1971, 142).
                       64   See also Serpieri (1930, 328–33).
                       65   For a dramatic reconstruction of the years of the civil war and the attacks of
                            the Fascist squads, see Tasca (1965, 143–221) and Salvemini (1966, chapter 19).
                       66   The book’s aim is in no way to claim that austerity was the only reason for



                     352




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   352        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 135–138

                            the defeat of the socialist proposals, as such a claim would entail counter-
                            factual analysis and a robust investigation of the internal weaknesses and
                            strengths of these very movements, which is not our objective here.



                     Chapter Five

                        1   In Genoa all the powers of Europe participated, including Germany, Rus-
                            sia, Austria, Hungary, and Bulgaria. The US was invited to both confer-
                            ences but declined to attend officially.
                        2   Luigi Facta, former Italian prime minister, at the first Genoa meeting,
                            quoted in Medlicott et al., eds. (1974, vol. 19, 305).
                        3   The outstanding issue of the Genoa conference, the one that caught the
                            most media and public attention, was Russia and its economic relations
                            with the West—the focus of the first committee. The reconciliation effort
                            failed because it left the Russian questions of recognition, credits, prop-
                            erty, and debts unanswered and because it failed to address the problem
                            of a new reparation crisis with Germany. The deep political opposition
                            between nations on certain issues (for example, that of France and Britain
                            on reparations, the recognition of the Russian government, Upper Silesia,
                            disarmament, and so on) did not undermine their unanimous consensus
                            on austerity—formalized by the commission on finance.
                        4   In 1922 the Economist noted that “Genoa, like Brussels, suffers from the
                            drawback that it cannot deal with the problems of reparations and war
                            debts or with political questions such as disarmament” (see “The Eve of the
                            Conference,” Economist, April 8, 1922, 661ff.). On the fundamental problem
                            of reparations and debt, see for example “A Critical Conference,” Econo-
                            mist, December 9, 1922, 1063ff.; see also the economist Gustav Cassel, who
                            laments “the narrow limits drawn up in advance for the deliberations of
                            the Genoa conference . . . the conference was required to make recommen-
                            dations for the recovery of a sick world without touching some essential
                            causes of the illness” (Cassel 1922, 140). See also other articles within the
                            same issue of the Manchester Guardian Commercial: J. M. Keynes, “The
                            Genoa Conference,” 132–33, and Francesco Saverio Nitti, “The Genoa Con-
                            ference,” 134–36.
                        5   I defined technocracy in the introduction to this book as the rule of eco-
                            nomic expertise, both in the historical form of economists advising and
                            implementing economic policies and in the epistemic form, whereby the
                            economist achieves a classless and neutral standpoint and posits univer-
                            sal value-free truths about an unchanging object. Such an object is never
                            understood as historically constructed by human practice, but rather as a
                            given, a fact of this world.
                        6   Preparing for the conference, the secretariat of the economic and finan-




                                                                                                      353




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   353        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 138–143


                            cial section of the League of Nations compiled fourteen preparatory
                            documents, containing empirical data and expert advice. The statistical
                            documents dealt with “Currency Statistics,” “Public Finance,” and “Inter-
                            national Trade.” They are collected in Brussels 1920, vol. 4. These statistics
                            were discussed thoroughly in the Economist (see for example “Some Recent
                            Budgets,” Economist, November 3, 1923, 783ff.). For a description of the
                            documents see Siepmann (1920, 437–39).
                        7   Davis continued: “The volumes of statistics are not merely collections of
                            crude figures. On the contrary, the data are selected, worked up, and care-
                            fully presented as a basis for interpretation” (Davis 1920, 350).
                        8   The members of the Advisory Committee (appointed by the secretary
                            general of the League of Nations) were Jean Monnet (Chairman, France);
                            Joseph Louis Avenol (France); Alberto Beneduce (Italy); R. H. Brand
                            (Great Britain); Dudley Ward (Great Britain); José Gonzales (Spain); W. T.
                            Layton (Director of the Secretariat of the Conference, Great Britain); and
                            Carel E. Ter Meulen (Holland).
                        9   International Financial Conference, Monetary Problems XIII: Joint Financial
                            Statement of the Economic Experts, reprinted in Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 2–3.
                       10   His Majesty’s Stationery Office (HMSO), “Reports of the Committee of
                            Experts Appointed by the Currency and Exchange sub-commission of the
                            Financial Commission,” 1922, London, cmd. 1650.
                       11   Amongst the many “financial ills from which the world is suffering” they
                            emphasized: the “enormous volume of both internal and external debt”;
                            an increase of government expenditure; the “enormously increased” paper
                            currencies leading to runaway inflation; worldwide “shortage of capital”;
                            and the breakdown of international trade (Brussels 1920, vol. 1, 4–5 and
                            vol. 3, ix).
                       12   “The Cooling Lava,” Economist, November 13, 1920, 857. Revival of Marxism
                            was a book by Joseph Shield Nicholson published in 1920.
                       13   Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 7.
                       14   The League of Nations put its pedagogic aims into practice by preparing
                            pamphlets and periodicals of comparative financial positions, which it con-
                            tinued publishing for years afterward. Furthermore, the Brussels financial
                            conference was sensitive toward public opinion and inaugurated “its own
                            economic news-sheet, called the Conference Forum or the Tribune Libre”
                            (Siepmann 1920, 441).
                       15   As discussed at length in the conclusion of this book, the literature of neo-
                            classical political economy normalizes the distrust for political institutions,
                            which therefore have to be reformed to give as much influence to indepen-
                            dent (non-elected) economic bodies as possible. See for example Vittorio
                            Grilli et al. (1991), Alesina and Summers (1993), and Alberto Alesina and
                            Vittorio Grilli, “The European Central Bank: Reshaping Monetary Policy in
                            Europe,” in Canzoneri et al. (1992).



                     354




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   354        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                  notes to pages 144–152


                       16   In the words of Brand, vice president of the financial committee in Brus-
                            sels, “revenue should at least be sufficient to meet all ordinary recurring
                            expenditure, including interest and sinking fund on debt” (Brussels 1920,
                            vol. 2, 19). Lord Chalmers went so far as to speak of a “universal” and “im-
                            perative” principle: individuals “must pay their way” (ibid., 25).
                       17   One of The General Theory’s main points of contention against the main-
                            stream framework was the rejection of the idea that investments = savings
                            (the so-called Say’s law). For Keynesians, what capital accumulation needs
                            is not more (potentially idle) savings, but rather an incentive for investors
                            to invest—that is, high enough profit expectations. High profit expectations
                            come with the expectation of selling more goods that can be guaranteed by
                            high aggregate demand—especially more government spending.
                       18   See chapter 4 for the episode of the factory occupation.
                       19   The Genoa resolutions reaffirmed that to achieve currency stability “the
                            reduction of Government expenditure is the true remedy,” since “in order
                            to gain effective control of its own currency, each Government must meet
                            its annual expenditure without resorting to the creation of fiduciary money
                            or bank credits for the purpose” (Report of the Second Commission
                            [Finance], Resolution 7 and Resolution 11, in Gordon and Montpetit 1922,
                            68–70). Moreover, a reduction and consolidation of public debt would
                            diminish the liquidity of the economy, since debt holders would be unable
                            to use maturing bonds as means of payment.
                       20   This diagnosis of inflation runs counter to the Keynesian argument devel-
                            oped in the 1930s, by which inflation is not caused by public deficit spend-
                            ing per se, but rather emerges when the economy reaches full capacity and
                            demand structurally outstrips supply. Thus, in the Keynesian argument
                            deficit spending does not provoke inflation until full employment.
                       21   Lloyd (1925). In its critical tone the article clearly specifies the pitfalls of de-
                            flation. The rise of the value of the pound necessarily involved: “1) a rising
                            exchange which was bound to hit the export industries particularly hard; 2)
                            falling prices, which were bound to hamper trade and industry in general;
                            3) a reduction of costs, which was bound to mean primarily a reduction
                            of wages; and lastly, 4) general unemployment on a large scale, since this
                            is the only known means by which wages can be forced down . . . and
                            rentiers, as a class, have not had their money incomes reduced as abstract
                            justice would have required” (1925, 414). Of course, revaluation was some-
                            thing that did benefit the parts of the population with savings and fixed
                            salaries, such as members of the bourgeoisie like university professors.
                       22   As we shall see in chapter 6, funding the floating debt acquired a further
                            important political purpose in Britain: to eliminate the exceptional postwar
                            situation whereby, due to the excessive circulation of government bonds,
                            the Bank of England’s monetary sovereignty was being challenged. Indeed,
                            creditors could evade the credit restrictions of the Bank by not renew-



                                                                                                            355




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   355        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                 6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to page 152


                            ing their Treasury bonds at maturity. On the other hand, once debt was
                            funded, the economic-political divide would once more achieve its force.
                            The government would no longer be involved in monetary management.
                       23   While in Brussels the issue was not yet ripe for consensus, by 1922 the
                            Genoa resolutions clearly stated that “It is in the general interest that
                            European Governments should declare now that the establishment of a
                            Gold Standard is their ultimate object” (Report of the Second Commission
                            [Finance] Resolution VI, in Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 68, my italics).
                       24   Before the war the currency was based on the value of gold, and thus fluc-
                            tuations of the rates of exchange were limited. These ideas had been clearly
                            formulated in the meeting of the London experts, where Ralph Hawtrey
                            had taken the floor (see chapter 6 for greater detail on his role and his
                            theories). The main intuition was that it was only through anchoring the
                            currency to a fixed parity with gold that it was possible to actually escape
                            the inherent instability of national and international currency.
                       25   As the resolutions suggested, their key function was to regulate credit “with
                            a view to maintaining the currencies at par” (Report of the Second Com-
                            mission [Finance], Resolution 11, in Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 70).
                       26   According to our experts, a rise in interest rates reacted to the rates for
                            money generally, and acted as a check in two ways. On the one hand,
                            increased money rates tended directly to attract gold to Britain or to keep
                            within the country gold that might otherwise have left. On the other hand,
                            by lessening the demand for loans for business purposes, they tended to
                            check expenditure and so to lower prices in Britain, with the result that
                            imports were discouraged and exports encouraged, and the exchanges
                            thereby turned in Britain’s favor.
                       27   The precondition for the gold standard was to stop inflation, which
                            required a balanced budget. In the words of Resolution VII: “So long as
                            there is a deficiency in the annual budget of the State which is met by the
                            creation of fiduciary money or bank credits, no currency reform is pos-
                            sible, and no approach to the establishment of the gold standard can be
                            made. The most important reform of all must therefore be the balancing of
                            the annual expenditure of the State without the creation of fresh credits un-
                            represented by new assets” (Report of the Second Commission [Finance],
                            in Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 68–69). Having achieved the gold standard,
                            the state was limited in its capacity to spend by losing the power to print
                            money to finance its expenditure while having to maintain a balance of
                            trade, as excessive imports would entail loss of gold.
                       28   Their firm commitment to gold was accompanied by an underlying fear of
                            the extreme consequences of deflation, in particular “for countries where
                            currency has fallen very far below the pre-war parity, a return to it must
                            involve the social and economic dislocation attendant upon continuing
                            readjustments of money-wages and prices, and a continual increase in the



                     356




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   356        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 155–162


                            burden of internal debt” (Reports of the Committee of Experts appointed
                            by the currency and exchange sub-commissions of the financial commis-
                            sion, Annex A, in Gordon and Montpetit 1922, 73). Most experts believed
                            that the transition to gold would be gradual, and would be done with
                            caution.
                       29   R. H. Brand repeated this idea: “The inadequacy of capital and conse-
                            quently of productive power is fundamental, and therefore, in my opinion,
                            it is the necessity of increasing it as rapidly as possible that should be the
                            main guide of Public Finance” (Brussels 1920, Verbatim Record, vol. 2, 16).
                       30   On Keynes’s position regarding monetary policy after the war, see How-
                            son’s (1973) classic, “A ‘Dear Money Man’?”
                       31   Keynes in February 1920, reprinted in Tooze (2014, 356).
                       32   The quote continues: “that is—to use the words of a statesman of my coun-
                            try, W. E. Gladstone—in favor of allowing money to fructify in the pockets
                            of the people, then, except in the cases of clearest necessity, it is imperative
                            that the Governments should restrict their expenditure within the smallest
                            dimensions” (R. H. Brand, Brussels 1920, Verbatim Record, vol. 2, 17).
                       33   Pantaleoni specified: “Governments have everywhere, but in a different
                            measure, taken into their management and away from private manage-
                            ment, a very large series of services for which they are utterly unfit, as
                            ancient and recent experience has proved, viz.: (a) They cannot manage
                            railways; (b) They cannot manage shipping; (c) They cannot manage har-
                            bours; (d) They cannot manage international commerce; (e) They cannot
                            manage the commerce in bills; (f) They cannot regulate prices of com-
                            modities; and (g) they cannot conserve and distribute commodities after
                            requisition” (Brussels 1920, vol. 5, 102).
                       34   Haldane to Escher, December 26, 1918, in Johnson (1968, 245).
                       35   Our comparative analysis of the Italian and British cases does not do jus-
                            tice to all other countries in which austerity was implemented after World
                            War I, including the United States, a country that implemented and pushed
                            to implement austerity overseas. See for example Migone (2015, 1–27).



                     Chapter Six

                        1   Including the likes of Professor Pigou and Treasury officials such as John
                            Bradbury and our protagonist, Basil Blackett.
                        2   HMSO 1918b, 5.
                        3   Austen Chamberlain, HC Deb 16 March 1920, vol. 126, cc 2069.
                        4   Ibid., cc 2071.
                        5   Mitchell (1998, 189, Table B4).
                        6   See Moggridge (1972) and Howson (1974) for a detailed documentation of
                            all the steps involved in a return to the gold standard.



                                                                                                        357




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   357        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 165–171


                        7   The Treasury’s role had grown as a response to the wartime loss of control
                            over inflationary government borrowing. “When the Cabinet decided to
                            strengthen the Treasury in 1919, what seems to have been uppermost in
                            ministers’ minds was the need for a powerful central department to control
                            the government machine and cut out waste. The permanent secretary of
                            the Treasury was designated head of the civil service, and in 1920 an order-
                            in-council consolidated the Treasury’s authority over the civil service by
                            stipulating that the Treasury could make regulations for controlling the
                            conduct of departments” (Peden 1983b, 376; for direct documentation on
                            these reforms see T 199/351). In general, for an account of the structure and
                            functioning of the Treasury in those years see Peden (2000, 128–90).
                        8   The equivalent of the minister of finance in most countries.
                        9   For example, in T 172/144b fols. 322–33, we find evidence that the chancel-
                            lor received the 1925 Gold Bill and Budget Speech written by Niemeyer.
                       10   The Oxford degree Literae Humaniores combined ancient history and
                            philosophy, using Greek and Latin texts, with modern philosophy, includ-
                            ing logic. In other words, Blackett and Niemeyer were not economists by
                            training. See Peden (2000, 20–21). Blackett and Niemeyer were practical
                            men; they did not write scientific papers. However, once at the Treasury, as
                            widely recognized financial and monetary experts they had many contacts
                            with the academic world. Blackett lectured at the American Academy of
                            Political and Social Sciences. He died in 1934 in a car accident on his way to
                            give a lecture at the University of Heidelberg. Niemeyer, on the other hand,
                            was granted the prestigious task of writing the entry on “debt conversion”
                            for the fourteenth edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica in 1930. He was
                            chairman of the London School of Economics Court of Governors from
                            1941 to 1957, and a governor until 1965.
                       11   Also Robert Boyce, speaking of Chancellor Snowden in 1923, attests that
                            “Snowden, dazzled by Norman, was also ready to defer to Sir Otto Nie-
                            meyer, his chief Treasury financial adviser, who soon dominated him as
                            completely as he did other Chancellors after the war” (Boyce 1987, 51).
                       12   See The Times: “New Greek Loan,” September 14, 1927, 10; “The Bulgarian
                            Loan Negotiations,” December 3, 1927, 12; “The Problem of Security,” Febru-
                            ary 27, 1928, 13; and “End of Geneva Meeting,” March 12, 1928, 13.
                       13   For a discussion of Niemeyer’s understanding of the role of central banking
                            in Argentina, see Sember (2012).
                       14   Daunton (2002, chapters 1–3) speaks about a “Gladstonian fiscal constitu-
                            tion.” On the Victorian legacy see Peden (1985, 1–12).
                       15   For an exposition on the content of the Treasury view, see Skidelsky (1981)
                            and Mattei (2016).
                       16   See article, “The Proposed Raise in the Bank Rate in the Near Future” by
                            J. E. Norton, in T 176/5, part 2, fols. 2–4, June 1924.
                       17   For a secondary literature on Hawtrey’s economic theory see Howson



                     358




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   358        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 171–172


                            (1978), Black (1977), Howson (1985), Deutscher (1990), Gaukroger (2008),
                            Mattei (2017 and 2018a).
                       18   There have been extensive debates on the relation between economic
                            ideas and practical knowledge: that is, on whether the Treasury view was
                            primarily the outcome of economic theory or rather a product of tradi-
                            tions of public finance and of the city of London (see Howson and Winch
                            1977; Tomlinson 1981; Middleton 1985; Clarke 1988; Peden 1983b, 1984, 1996,
                            2000, 2004b; Mattei 2016, 2018a, 2018b). Our thesis provides an integra-
                            tion of the two: certainly the British Treasury did not adopt fiscal and
                            monetary rigor because of Hawtrey’s theory, yet his theory was central to
                            refining austerity in its fullest form after the war. Hawtrey himself had been
                            largely influenced by the practical wisdom of his senior colleagues at the
                            Treasury, especially John Bradbury—the influential pro-austerity Treasury
                            official who preceded Blackett and Niemeyer in steering the Treasury in
                            his position as joint permanent secretary (1913–1919). Moreover, Hawtrey
                            was something of an outsider to academic economic orthodoxy, which
                            allowed him to offer original insights that escaped many of the bonds of
                            conventional economic thinking. As Peden notes, when Hawtrey wrote
                            his first books, he was “less than wholly conversant with the current
                            literature” (Peden 1996). In Hawtrey’s 1913 text the only reference to an-
                            other economist was to Irving Fisher, and that reference was added after
                            Hawtrey had finished the first draft. Moreover, Hawtrey denied that his
                            theory on trade cycles was derived from that of Alfred Marshall (Deutscher
                            1990, 8, 247).
                       19   His position as in-house economist was not high enough to speak directly
                            to the chancellor on his own initiative, however. Most often, Hawtrey
                            would communicate his ideas through the controller: that is, through
                            Blackett or Niemeyer.
                       20   Hawtrey’s influence on the Treasury officials had waned in the 1930s (How-
                            son 1978, 509–10). He was not involved in giving economic advice during
                            the Second World War, by which time he was past the normal retirement
                            age. He was employed keeping a record of financial policy.
                       21   Hawtrey was a prolific writer: between 1913 and 1940 he published twelve
                            books and at least forty-four articles, not to mention the numerous book
                            reviews that he regularly wrote for economics journals. Hawtrey became
                            a fellow of the British Academy in 1935, and upon retirement he served as
                            president of the Royal Economic Society from 1946 to 1948.
                       22   Hawtrey ultimately had an over-consumptionist monetary theory of the
                            business cycle that differed from a standard monetarist reading. As he put
                            it: “the quantity theory by itself is inadequate, and it leads up to the method
                            of treatment based on what I have called the consumers’ income and the
                            consumers’ outlay—that is to say, simply the aggregates of individual
                            incomes and individual expenditures” (Hawtrey 1919a, Preface, v).



                                                                                                       359




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   359        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 172–174


                       23   Conversations with Francis Spreng in 1973 and 1974, reprinted in Howson
                            (1985a, 156).
                       24   On Hawtrey’s optimistic views about returning to the gold standard
                            without further monetary deflation see Mattei (2018b). It is worth noting
                            that Hawtrey did not endorse a pure gold standard; rather, he proposed a
                            gold exchange standard that would allow central banks to hold a limited
                            amount of reserves in gold-related currencies as fully equivalent to gold,
                            thus economizing on the use of gold and reducing the excess demand for it,
                            which would further increase the necessity of deflation. Moreover, Hawtrey
                            recommended that central banks, at least the Federal Reserve System and
                            the Bank of England, should cooperate to control the supply of credit by
                            reference to an index number of prices and other indicators of the state
                            of trade. Hawtrey believed that the gold exchange standard scheme he
                            proposed at Genoa was a marked improvement on the prewar conception:
                            “the present resolutions improve upon the pre-war standard in two ways:
                            1) by adopting an exchange standard which will economize the actual use
                            of gold; 2) by coordinating the value of gold as currency so as to stabilize its
                            value in relation to commodities. (The second represents the most hopeful
                            method for attaining stabilization)” (T 208/28, fol. 11).
                       25   Archival evidence of their exchanges is a basis for challenging the conven-
                            tional account of Hawtrey as a man of respected intellect who was yet “kept
                            at a distance from the main process of policy formulation” (Deutscher
                            1990, 3). This account caught on with Winston Churchill’s claim that
                            “the learned man be released from the dungeon in which we were said to
                            have immured him” (cited in Black 1977, 379) and John Maynard Keynes’s
                            reference to “the Hawtrey backwater” (Howson and Winch 1977, 25). It has
                            persisted despite Robert Black’s attempted correction (Black 1977, 378).
                       26   One remarkable set of Niemeyer’s files on monetary policy comprises
                            mainly Hawtrey’s memoranda (see T176/5). One example of how Niemeyer
                            actively deployed Hawtreyan ideas is in his correspondence with the
                            International Labour Office (ILO) official, Sir Llewellyn Smith. In order to
                            formulate his replies, Niemeyer wrote to Hawtrey for advice on the relation
                            between monetary policy and unemployment. The letters to Smith show
                            that Niemeyer fully used Hawtrey’s memo, the main theme being in fact
                            the Hawtreyan concept of credit stabilization as the ultimate solution to
                            unemployment (see T 208/95).
                       27   Again, on October 12, 1922, Norman wrote, “Dear Hawtrey, thank you for
                            sending me your paper on the Genoa resolutions. I have read it with the
                            appreciation of the lucidity of your argument and the compression of your
                            thought and I would say that the Central Banks could in practice attain to
                            the ideal that is set before them!”
                       28   Other participants of the Tuesday Club included economists Walter
                            Layton, Hubert Henderson, and Dennis H. Roberton; City financers like



                     360




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   360        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 174–175


                            Charles Addis, Bob Brand, Reginald McKenna, and Henry Strakosch;
                            public servants such as John Anderson and Josiah Stamp; and financial
                            journalists like A. W. Kiddy and Hartley Withers (Skidelsky, 2003, 264).
                       29   The concept of currency was secondary to credit (or debt, debt being just
                            the opposite of credit), as money was nothing but “the medium with which
                            debts are legally payable” (Hawtrey 1925a, 232). This Hawtreyan perspective
                            clearly differed from other monetary theories, such as those proposed by
                            Marx and by Keynes (after 1936 in the General Theory), that understood
                            money as a store of value. For Hawtrey, the initiative of production rested
                            on the orders of the “dealer” or trader, i.e., the intermediary between the
                            producer and the consumer. The subsequent process of production gives
                            rise to a chain of debts: “The manufacturer or contractor becomes indebted
                            day by day to his employees. The merchant becomes indebted to the manu-
                            facturer” (Hawtrey 1919a, 376).
                       30   Other passages point out to the relation between increased credit and an
                            increase in effective demand: “So we reach the conclusion that an accelera-
                            tion or retardation of the creation of credit means an equal increase or
                            decrease in people’s incomes” (Hawtrey 1919a, 40). And again: “Inflation
                            consists in the spread of the infection of high prices through production to
                            the consumers’ income and thus to the consumers’ outlay” (ibid., 114).
                       31   As Keynes did in 1930, as early as 1919 Hawtrey understood effective de-
                            mand as made up of two components: the part of purchasing power appli-
                            cable to consumption and the part applicable to investment. Hawtrey wrote
                            “the purchasing power applicable to accumulation, as distinguished from
                            consumption, comes from two sources, from savings and from banker’s
                            loans” (Hawtrey 1919a, 348). Keynes specified that effective demand is
                            the point at which aggregate demand equals aggregate supply. Keynes
                            understands this equilibrium point from the perspective of the entrepre-
                            neur such that aggregate demand is his expected proceeds from employing
                            a certain number of men (which corresponds to the expectations about
                            the amount society spends on consumption and the amount it spends on
                            investment). Aggregate supply, on the other hand, is the benchmark: the
                            amount of proceeds an entrepreneur needs to expect in order to justify his
                            outlay in wages (“expectations of proceeds required to employ N men”).
                            The innovation that explains why Keynes attached such an importance to
                            government expenditure is his idea that, within free market capitalism,
                            effective demand is usually deficient with respect to the level needed to
                            achieve full employment. This is because, most of the time, entrepreneurs
                            do not have sufficiently high expectations to actually invest. The problem
                            of idle savings was not an issue for Hawtrey. Hawtrey believed that money
                            which was saved would be spent “sooner or later” on fixed capital or in-
                            vested abroad. Thus, while Hawtrey’s models are primarily concerned with
                            inflation due to over-consumption, Keynes’s primary concern in the 1930s



                                                                                                      361




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   361        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 175–177


                            lies in a shortfall of investment (also motivated by under-consumption). It
                            is interesting to note, however, that in 1919 Hawtrey did introduce a crucial
                            insight for the later Keynesian framework: he points to the fact that supply
                            is governed by effective demand. In his words: “The employment of the
                            country’s productive resources is governed by effective demand” (Hawtrey
                            1919a, 348) and again: “production feeds demand, demand stimulates pro-
                            duction” (ibid., 376).
                       32   “An indefinite expansion of credit seems to be in the immediate interest of
                            merchants and bankers alike. The continuous and progressive rise of prices
                            makes it profitable to hold goods in stock, and the rate of interest which
                            the merchant who holds such goods is prepared to pay is correspondingly
                            high” (Hawtrey 1919a, 13). It is this self-propelling inflationary mechanism,
                            driven by the rational reactions of economic agents, by which “there is an
                            inherent tendency on the part of traders to borrow more and more and
                            of bankers to lend more and more” (ibid., 30), that caused an increase in
                            the velocity of circulation of the monetary unit and thus a depreciation
                            of the currency. It followed that “the expansive tendencies of credit are in
                            perpetual conflict with the maintenance of a fixed standard of value” (ibid.,
                            16), since the currency “could be indefinitely depreciated” (ibid., 52).
                       33   Hawtrey explains: “As prices rise, the quantity of credit needed to finance
                            a given consignment of goods increases in proportion, and the creation of
                            credit is still further accelerated” (1919a, 43).
                       34   Hawtrey thought this was especially true in the war and postwar moment.
                            See Hawtrey (1919a, 344–63).
                       35   In this sense, Hawtrey was amongst the first to introduce the income ap-
                            proach to international trade theory.
                       36   Together with his colleagues, Hawtrey uncritically adhered to the re-
                            nowned Say’s law, which pictures savings flowing smoothly into the stream
                            of spending. Savings and investment were considered to be equated
                            by variation in the rate of interest. In this sense, the problem of under-
                            investment, which might also be called excessive savings, was not usually
                            a concern. For Hawtrey such flows were kept equal by the workings of the
                            investment market (see Davis 1981, 213–15). On Hawtrey’s views see also
                            Peden (1996, 75–81).
                       37   Hawtrey agreed and admonished: “If expenditure is directed too much to
                            consumption and too little to investment, the process of economic recovery
                            is retarded and the scarcity of commodities is intensified and prolonged”
                            (Hawtrey 1919a, 350).
                       38   The “thrifty man” from the working class could “put his savings into a sav-
                            ings bank”; however, “he must first see to it that he has a little money in the
                            house” (Hawtrey 1919a, 22).
                       39   In Hawtrey’s economic model, the “consumer outlay” included two distinct




                     362




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   362        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 178–181

                            actions: consumption on expendable goods and services (unproductive
                            consumption), and savings in the form of investments in assets, shares, and
                            bonds (productive consumption). Deutscher (1990) suggests that Hawtrey’s
                            terminology does not distinguish between spending on goods and spend-
                            ing on securities. Both elements were part of the consumer outlay.
                       40   Middle classes, very broadly defined, included white-collar workers who
                            lacked powerful trade unions to protect them against inflation. At a time
                            when there were only means-tested state old age pensions, and not all pri-
                            vate companies provided pensions (and these were not index-linked), such
                            people relied on accumulating savings over their working lives to support
                            them when they retired (personal communication with Peden).
                       41   Hawtrey endlessly repeated that “financial strain” was the main obstacle to
                            currency reform. Budgetary rigor was crucial in controlling inflation—or
                            better, it was a prerequisite for currency stabilization (Hawtrey 1919b, 435).
                            His preaching found international acclamation. The Genoa resolutions
                            directly transcribed Hawtrey’s firsthand draft memos: “In each country,
                            the first step towards re-establishing a gold standard will be the balancing
                            of the annual expenditure of the State . . . [this] is the necessary and suf-
                            ficient condition for gaining control of the currency” (“Financial Subjects,”
                            T 208/28, fol. 6). In March 1922, Niemeyer steadfastly reaffirmed the man-
                            date for British citizens of being truthful to fiscal orthodoxy: “If we do not
                            ourselves balance our budget, the whole movement for sounder financial
                            and commercial conditions in Europe will receive a mortal setback” (“Note
                            to the Chancellor of the Exchequer,” T 171/202, 28).
                       42   The exemption limit was reduced from £160 to £130, which meant a three-
                            fold increase in taxpayers by 1918–1919 as compared with five years prior.
                            By the summer of 1917 there was a full-blown movement in opposition to
                            the reduction of the exemption limit, mainly led by miners and coal work-
                            ers who often refused to pay income tax. Its basis was on the Clydeside, the
                            Midlands, parts of London, and South Wales (see Whiting 1990).
                       43   In the words of Vernon Hartshorn, a leading figure in the South Wales
                            Miners Federation and Labour MP: “All these people who have that pay
                            increase and are brought under the tax are simply being taxed on the extra
                            cost of living; they have simply to pay the tax with money that has been
                            allowed them on account of the extra cost of living” (T 172/982, fols. 17–18,
                            in Whiting 1990, 907).
                       44   Blackett’s predecessor Bradbury held the same convictions: “Taxation for
                            the purpose of repayment of domestic debt tends by a process of compul-
                            sory thrift to increase rather than diminish the capital resources of the
                            nation” (John Bradbury, “Reconstruction Finance,” T 170/125, fol. 4, 1918).
                       45   Herbert Samuel’s presidential address to the Royal Statistical Society made
                            clear that “The British system of taxation is regressive in the lower stages;




                                                                                                      363




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   363        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 182–185


                            the classes with the smallest incomes pay a larger proportion of them in
                            contributions to the revenue than the classes immediately above them. . . .
                            Such regression is the consequence of relying for revenue to so large an
                            extent as we do upon the taxation of alcohol, tobacco, tea and sugar, and
                            of the fact that the consumption of these articles is larger in proportion to
                            income among the poorer classes” (Samuel 1919, 180).
                       46   “A large part of the debt is held by the banks and in connection with the
                            monetary system of the country; here the interest will in general be placed
                            at industry’s dispose. Another large part is held by joint stock companies,
                            and the interest is a direct payment to industry; the same is true of interest
                            paid to those individuals who will invest it in private businesses of their
                            own” (HMSO 1927, 99).
                       47   For a brief history of the ideological footing of Labour’s position on taxes,
                            see Daunton (2002, 50–60).
                       48   “What trade needs,” Niemeyer claimed, “is for taxation to be reduced as
                            a consequence of reducing expenditure. A transfer of expenditure from
                            taxation to borrowing is at any rate of much less use to trade and in so far
                            as it reduces pressure for the reduction of expenditure [underlined in the
                            original] maybe positively harmful to trade” (“The Burden of Taxation,”
                            T. 171/202, fol. 28).
                       49   These demands for economy persisted for years. A confidential circu-
                            lar communication of 1923 “on the subject of economy” (also called
                            “the economy letter” or “the Treasury circular on economy”), sent from
                            the Treasury to all departments, including the board of Education, the
                            Ministry of Labour, and the Ministry of Pensions asking for their expen-
                            diture and aggregate savings estimates, communicated that “every effort
                            in economy will therefore be needed in order to balance the budget in
                            1924/25” (N. F. Warren Fisher, June 1, 1923, T 160/159).
                       50   Not counting the demobilization periods immediately after each world war.
                       51   The committee worked in stages, delivering reports to the government at
                            monthly intervals between December 1921 and February 1922 that were
                            considered in cabinet committees before being published in February 1922.
                            See First Interim Report of Committee on National Expenditure (Cmd.
                            1581), Second Interim Report of Committee on National Expenditure
                            (Cmd. 1582), and Third Report of Committee on National Expenditure
                            (Cmd. 1589). See also McDonald (1989).
                       52   Even prior to the Geddes Axe, the Treasury had been successful in
                            imposing a decision “not on merits but on financial considerations only”
                            (Finance Committee, 30 June 1921, TNA, CAB 27/71). The crusade of the
                            Treasury against the ambitious postwar housing programs dated back to
                            1919. The Treasury had refused to allocate the resources needed to face
                            capital shortages. It doubled down with high interest rates on Treasury bills




                     364




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   364        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 185–189


                            (6 percent) that disincentivized investment in local authorities’ housing
                            bonds (which were at 5.5 percent), thus draining sources of investment. In
                            November 1920, Chamberlain had asked the Cabinet to restrict Addison’s
                            plan of building 800,000 public houses to 160,000. However, until that
                            autumn the government’s commitment to the “Land Fit for Heroes” pre-
                            rogative remained intact. Treasury cavils were rejected on the grounds that
                            the government could not afford to break its pledges on housing. Not until
                            1921, with the collapse of the postwar boom and the weakening of labor’s
                            power, were the political conditions ripe for the government to surrender
                            to the Treasury’s demands for economy.
                       53   In March 1921 the government transferred Christopher Addison from the
                            Ministry of Health to the anomalous post of minister without portfolio.
                            After he resigned, Addison wrote a fierce pamphlet, The Betrayal of the
                            Slums (1922), to denounce the government’s austerity moves.
                       54   See Thomas and Dimsdale (2017); for health and education, table A28a;
                            and for data on public sector debt interest payments see table A28.
                       55   Unemployment insurance in Britain also fell victim to austerity. Through-
                            out the 1920s mechanisms were constantly devised to reduce its coverage
                            and costs, by enacting the requirement to “be genuinely searching for
                            work” and harsh means tests that excluded married women from receiving
                            benefits—see Thane (1982).
                       56   In its numerous memos to the Geddes Committee, the Treasury advocated
                            for substantially reducing the staff of the various ministries and depart-
                            ments and even closing them down. See for example “Treasury Report to
                            Geddes committee, Ministry of Transport estimates 1922/1923” (T 186/25).
                       57   On the Gairloch episode see Peden (1993).
                       58   Niemeyer had already expressed these thoughts clearly to the colonial
                            secretary, Winston Churchill, in October 1921. Churchill had asked him to
                            disclose the Treasury view concerning financial conduct and employment,
                            and his reply was concise but effective: “The best assistance which the State
                            can give to unemployment . . . is 1) to reduce its expenditure 2) to repay
                            its debts” (T 176/5, part 2, fol. 39). Thus, he continued, “It is obvious that
                            certain minimum immediate assistance must be given to the unemployed
                            to prevent starvation but for the ultimate solution of the unemployment
                            problem it is essential that this assistance should be kept at the minimum”
                            (ibid., fol. 38).
                       59   According to this view, the crowding out occurs because savers invest in
                            government bonds instead of other productive ventures and because in
                            borrowing from the public the government competes for a limited pool
                            of funds and thus increases the cost of borrowing money for other private
                            investors. Their arguments were surely influential, since it was Churchill’s
                            budget speech of April 15, 1929 that provided the most clear-cut statement




                                                                                                      365




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   365        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 189–191


                            of the crowding-out argument: “The orthodox Treasury view . . . is that
                            when the Government borrow[s] in the money market it becomes a new
                            competitor with industry and engrosses to itself resources which would
                            otherwise have been employed by private enterprise, and in the process
                            raises the rent of money to all that have need of it” (Winston Churchill,
                            HC Deb 15 April 1929, vol. 227, 5s, 1928–29, fols. 53–54, cited in Peden
                            2004a, 57).
                       60   For an account of the evolution of Keynes’s ideas see Moggridge (1976) and
                            Howson (1973).
                       61   Hawtrey’s most famous formulation of the crowding-out argument is in
                            “Public Expenditure and the Demand for Labour” (Hawtrey 1925b), where
                            he sought explicitly to refute the policy of public intervention through pub-
                            lic works designed to alleviate the huge British unemployment problem.
                            He had expressed these ideas repeatedly in his prior scholarly works (see
                            for example Hawtrey 1919a, 208, and 1913) and in his Treasury memoranda.
                            Hawtrey fundamentally thought that in moments of economic downturn
                            the creation of bank credit alone would be sufficient to increase employ-
                            ment, and that public works would be “unnecessary.” He put it strongly:
                            “The public works are merely a piece of ritual, convenient to people who
                            want to be able to say that they are doing something, but otherwise ir-
                            relevant. To stimulate an expansion of credit is usually only too easy. To
                            resort for the purpose to the construction of expensive public works is to
                            burn down the house for the sake of the roast pig” (Hawtrey 1925b, 44). For
                            a good explanation of Hawtrey’s crowding out argument see Peden (1996).
                       62   In his memorandum on “Unemployment,” Baldwin’s home secretary, Sir
                            William Joynson-Hicks, made clear that the only way for the Conservative
                            government to escape “vilification” at the general elections for “its insuf-
                            ficient unemployment policies” was a “comprehensive” stimulus through
                            large publicly funded loans to extend the productive power of the domin-
                            ions and “road construction on a fairly large scale” (HMSO 1929, 294–300)
                            that could compete with the ambitious proposals of the Labour and Liberal
                            parties.
                       63   The theoretical assumption was that monetary wages would be flexible
                            downward as prices fell and that workers would price themselves into jobs.
                       64   Or in the words of Hawtrey: “Deflation therefore means a reduction of
                            profits and wages. If wages resist the process and it falls unduly on profits,
                            the result is unemployment” (Hawtrey 1919a, 361). Blackett warned the
                            chancellor that any form of government expenditure would prevent
                            wages and costs of living from going down. In his words, “So long as the
                            British government is creating new credit to meet its expenditure or to
                            replace maturing short debt, there is added difficulty in getting prices and
                            wages and the cost of living down to reasonable figures” (August 6, 1921,
                            T 175/6 part 1, fol. 15). Hence, as Niemeyer repeated, “Ambitious schemes



                     366




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   366        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 191–194


                            of expenditures or credits can only intensify the evils of unemployment by
                            maintaining wages and prices and making its ultimate remedy more dif-
                            ficult” (T 176/5, part 2, fols. 38–39).
                       65   Also, Blackett displayed a sharp understanding of the political issues at
                            stake: “Falling prices,” he emphasized, “are disliked by all traders, and
                            however much a worker as a consumer may dislike high prices, he dislikes
                            still more reductions in wages and lack of employment” (T 176/5, part 2,
                            fol. 50).
                       66   Another crucial aspect of the Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act was
                            the limits it placed on the political power of labor, striking at its party and
                            unions. The Labour Party was robbed of much of its funding with the pro-
                            hibition of “any contribution to the political fund of a trade union” unless
                            a formal notice was sent out declaring the union members’ “willingness to
                            contribute to that fund.” Instead of “contracting out,” as stipulated by the
                            1913 Trade Union Act, union members now had to “contract in.” As a result
                            of this legislation, in just two years the Labour Party lost substantial finan-
                            cial resources (a quarter of its total income from affiliation funds) and a
                            third of its subscriptions (Cole 1948, 195). Moreover, the British state barred
                            civil servants from participation in labor organizations with the risk of
                            “disqualification and discharge from the service.” This law severely limited
                            the political freedom of public employees. According to Millis, “of 300,000
                            or 400,000 civil servants, 130,000, a majority of whom were telephone
                            and telegraph operators and others employed in the postal service, had
                            membership in seven organizations affiliated to the Trade Union Congress
                            and the Labour Party. In some instances this affiliation dated back to 1906”
                            (Millis 1928, 326–27).
                       67   For Hawtrey’s emphatic defense of an “orthodox theory of the money mar-
                            ket” that “prescribes high money rates as the remedy for adverse exchanges
                            and for the other symptoms of a too great expansion of credit,” see his
                            memo “Cheap or Dear Money” (February 4, 1920, T 176/5, part 2, fols. 71–
                            76). This is a memo that both Niemeyer and Blackett studied closely.
                       68   For a discussion of Hawtrey’s theory of the quick effectiveness of a change
                            in bank rates for both deflationary and inflationary purposes, see Mattei
                            (2018a, 477–79). It is noteworthy that the key difference between Keynes
                            and Hawtrey in the 1920s was that Hawtrey attached enormous influence
                            to the short-term interest rate (because short-term borrowing financed
                            retailers’ and wholesalers’ stock), whereas for Keynes the long-term rate
                            was more important (because private investment is eventually “funded” by
                            stock issues). Hawtrey’s critique of Keynes in A Century of Bank Rate (1938)
                            was to show that the long-term rate did not vary much, and therefore could
                            not be an explanation of volatile investment.
                       69   For an application of Hawtrey’s model to the British situation, see his
                            memo “The Credit Situation” (June 8, 1921, T 17/6 part 1, fols. 5–15).



                                                                                                       367




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   367        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 194–196


                       70   For data on Bank rates and Treasury bill rates, see Howson (1975, table 3,
                            p. 50, and Appendix 2, pp. 160–66). For banknote circulation see Mitchell
                            (1998, table G1, p. 789).
                       71   Chamberlain was aware of Keynes’s suggestion: “K. would go for a financial
                            crisis (doesn’t believe it would lead to unemployment). Would go to what-
                            ever rate is necessary—perhaps 10—and keep it at that for three years”
                            (February 4, 1920, T 172/1384). The Treasury file (T 172/1384) was collected
                            during the Second World War at Keynes’s request and includes a com-
                            ment by him in 1942 which shows that he did not regret having given this
                            advice at that time. He wrote: “What impresses me most is the complete
                            hopelessness of the situation. All controls had been abandoned. . . . With
                            all the methods of control, then so unorthodox, excluded, I feel myself that
                            I should give today exactly the same advice that I gave then, namely a swift
                            and severe dose of dear money, sufficient to break the market, and quick
                            enough to prevent at least some of the disastrous consequences which
                            would otherwise ensue. In fact, the remedies of the economists were taken,
                            but too timidly” (T 172/1384, fol. 3). For further information on Keynes’s
                            views on monetary policy in 1920 and their relation to his later views, see
                            Howson (1973).
                       72   “Keynes’s Note of Interview with Chancellor” (February 15, 1920,
                            T 172/1384, in Howson 1973, 459).
                       73   Falling prices increased the value of financial assets that were fixed in
                            nominal terms, notably the war-swollen national debt, and thus increased
                            the wealth of holders of these assets—mainly the better-off members of the
                            community and financial institutions. The assumption was again of an im-
                            mediate connection between savings and capital formation. In March 1920
                            Blackett shared with the chancellor an article by Pigou that reiterated the
                            common dogma: “The country is in tremendous need for new capital. . . .
                            It is imperative, therefore, that people should save. Cheap money does not
                            encourage them to do this. Dear money does” (A. C. Pigou, “Dear Money,”
                            The Times, March 1, 1920, 10; also in T172/1384, fol. 50).
                       74   While economic historians may debate whether monetary austerity was
                            the primary cause for the slump, there is no doubt that it was a central
                            factor and that it contributed to the slump’s “severity and length” (Peden
                            2000, 153).
                       75   High rates persisted throughout the decade, with the result that currency
                            in circulation dropped impressively, falling by almost 21 percent from 1920
                            to 1929. One must consider that high bank rates in a time of falling prices
                            were much higher in real terms, since they had a large deterrent effect
                            on investment by creating expectations of falling prices and thus falling
                            profits. This was the typical deflationary spiral that haunted Britain for the
                            decade.




                     368




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   368        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                 notes to pages 197–198


                       76   Hawtrey’s criticism about the perpetuation of a dear money policy in-
                            creased after 1925, once the gold standard was achieved (see Howson 1978,
                            507–8). Yet his fear of inflation continued to haunt him so that in the late
                            1930s, when revival and rearmament were threatening to produce a boom,
                            Hawtrey argued for a dear money policy once more (ibid., 510).
                       77   “Under the Gold Standard the supply of legal tender was related to the
                            supply of gold, all bank notes being backed by gold, apart from a certain
                            amount, fixed by statute, known as the fiduciary issue” (Peden 2000, 151).
                       78   There has been an intense debate among British historians about the
                            extent to which the decision to go back to the gold standard was benefiting
                            financial interests over industrial interests. We do not intend to simplify
                            the complex composition of capitalist dynamics and the structural conflicts
                            among competing sectors of the capitalist class (see Harvey 1982, chapter
                            10). However, as chapter 9 will fully articulate, this book argues that austere
                            discipline and the consequent defeat of the embattled British workers,
                            emblematically represented in the defeat of the 1926 general strike, was
                            beneficial not just to specific sectors of the capitalist class but to the preser-
                            vation of capital order altogether.
                       79   The decline in volume of exports between 1925 and 1926 was soon recuper-
                            ated with a substantial increase in 1927, leading to an improvement of
                            the trade deficit in subsequent years. See Thomas and Dimsdale (2017,
                            table A.36). The same drop in exports occurred with the harsh 1920 defla-
                            tion. However, as early as 1922 the volume of exports was higher than in
                            1919 and 1920.
                       80   In fact, once the gold standard was in place, the avoidance of gold outflows
                            required a favorable balance of trade. Toward this end, deflation of UK
                            prices and incomes was crucial to offset the overvaluation of the currency
                            and keep British exports competitive. In turn, low public and private
                            consumption kept imports in check. If the country was importing too
                            much, the drainage of gold would raise prices and restrict consumption.
                            Furthermore, throughout the decade, austerity measures constituted the
                            “proper economic barriers against the export of capital” (Bradbury in
                            Howson 1974, 96). Indeed, high bank rates were the instrument to avoid
                            capital flight to America, at a time when speculation in that country was
                            high and London had been dethroned as the leading financial center. As a
                            result of the way the war had been financed, the Bank of England had more
                            short-term assets held by foreigners in London than short-term debts of
                            foreigners to London. The ratio of the former to the latter became 2:1 in the
                            1920s, whereas in 1914 it was approximately 1:1. Thus, sterling was always
                            vulnerable to movement of funds from London if interest rates were higher
                            elsewhere or if fund-holders felt that sterling’s exchange rate would fall
                            (Peden, 1985, 72–73).




                                                                                                          369




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   369        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.               6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 201–207


                       81   J. Bradbury, “Relations between the Treasury and the Bank of England:
                            Testimony of Former Permanent Secretaries and Controllers of Finance”
                            (T 176/13, fol. 23).
                       82   By 1922 its operational position was much stronger than the prewar years,
                            with its new capacity to engage in active open market operations (see
                            Moggridge 1972, 26).
                       83   On the other hand, as an expert body, the central bank played a direct part
                            in the consultations by which the financial ministers made their decisions
                            (see Hawtrey 1928).
                       84   These types of answers were given time and again to Parliament (see
                            T 176/13, fols. 9–15).



                     Chapter Seven

                        1   Literally: “regime della lesina,” where “lesinare” is an Italian word synony-
                            mous with the English verb “to economize.”
                        2   All these sensational events have been widely documented by both con-
                            temporary observers and historians, and the classic work of Angelo Tasca
                            (1965) is an unbeatable portrait of one of the tensest epochs of Italian
                            history.
                        3   Italian Liberal governments made efforts to balance the budget in 1921–
                            1922 (Frascani 1975; Toniolo 1980, chapter 2; Ciocca 2007, chapter 7), but
                            it was only during the Fascist years that the country’s economic agenda
                            appeared to have the potential to embody austerity successfully. Many
                            influential economists and politicians were ready to test Mussolini’s ability
                            to normalize the financial situation. Thus, prominent figures of the Liberal
                            establishment (for example, the historian Salvemini, the politicians Nitti
                            and Giolitti, and the economists Einaudi, Giretti, and De Viti De Marco)
                            expressed vocal support for the new ministry’s full powers.
                        4   The four economists were primary, though not alone, in their support for
                            the regime. Support was widespread in the profession and included the
                            most prominent economists of the time. Michelini (2011b, 47–50) docu-
                            ments how the majority of economic journals, including the two principal
                            reviews of Italian economic theory—Il Giornale degli Economisti and La
                            Reforma Sociale—published articles endorsing Mussolini’s agenda.
                        5   See Rossi (1955), Salvemini (1966), Lyttelton (1973), Guarneri (1953).
                        6   A royal decree is synonymous with a presidential executive order—one that
                            does not require a bill to be introduced in the parliament and subjected to
                            scrutiny and debate. See “Legal Decree for the Delegation of Full Pow-
                            ers to Sir Majesty’s Government for the Rearrangement of the Taxation
                            System and of Public Administration,” Law 1601, December 3, in GU 293
                            (December 15, 1922). For a detailed description of Fascist economic policies



                     370




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   370        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 207–208


                            see Gangemi (1929). Lello Gangemi collaborated with De Stefani at the
                            Ministry of Finance.
                        7   Pantaleoni became full professor [professore ordinario] of science of
                            finances [scienze delle finanze] in 1884. He then became full professor of
                            political economy (the equivalent of economics today) in Naples, Geneva,
                            and Pavia. From 1901 till his death in 1924 he held the prestigious chair of
                            political economy at Rome La Sapienza. In 1921 De Stefani became profes-
                            sor of political economy at Scuola Superiore di Commercio of Venice (Ca’
                            Foscari). In 1925 he became full professor of politics and financial legisla-
                            tion [politica e legislazione finanziaria], and in 1929 he was full professor
                            of economic and financial policy in the department of political sciences
                            at Rome La Sapienza. In 1954 he became emeritus professor. Umberto
                            Ricci also had an extensive academic career: he became full professor of
                            political economy in Macerata (1912–14), then professor of statistics in
                            Parma (1915–18) and Pisa (1919–21), after which he became professor of
                            political economy in Bologna (1922–24). Ricci succeeded Pantaleoni at the
                            University of Rome La Sapienza (1924–28). Luigi Einaudi was full profes-
                            sor of science of finances [scienze delle finanze] at the University of Turin
                            (1902); then he directed the Economics Institute at Bocconi University of
                            Milan (1920–26). The secondary literature on Einaudi is endless; amongst
                            many, see Del Vecchio (2011), Farese (2012), Faucci (1986), Forte (2009),
                            Einaudi (2000). On Pantaleoni, see Augello and Michelini (1997), Bellanca
                            (1995), Giocoli and Bellanca (1998), Bini (1995), Bini (2007), Bini (2013),
                            De Cecco (1995), Marcoaldi (1980), Michelini (1992), Michelini (1998),
                            Michelini (2011a), Mosca (2015). While the literature on Einaudi and
                            Pantaleoni abounds, research on Ricci and De Stefani is more limited. On
                            Ricci, the main references are Bini and Fusco (2004), Ciocca (1999), Fausto
                            (2004), Busino (2000), Dominedò (1961). On De Stefani, see Perfetti in De
                            Stefani and Perfetti (2013), Spaventa in De Stefani (1998), Gangemi (1929),
                            Marcoaldi (1986), Banca d’Italia (1983), Parrillo (1984). For a broad picture
                            of the four authors, within the wider context of Italian economics of the
                            time, see Faucci (2014, chapters 6–7). Mattei (2017) expounds on some of
                            the topics that this chapters delves deeper into. For an excellent reconstruc-
                            tion of the international economic debate in which the Italian authors
                            participated, see Marchionatti (2021).
                        8   During and after World War I Pantaleoni published frequently in the press
                            (especially Il Mezzogiorno, Il Popolo d’ Italia, Politica, etc.). The Laterza
                            publishing house collected many of his articles as books (Pantaleoni 1917,
                            1918, 1919, 1922). As Michelini notes, “In these writings Pantaleoni was
                            clearly intent on offering an organic concatenation of economic theory and
                            politics” (Michelini 2020, 32). Indeed, his political writings were imbued
                            with his economic principles, displaying the interconnection between
                            theory, economic policy, and political militancy; this link is also visible in



                                                                                                      371




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   371        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 208–209


                            the publications of his colleagues. Ricci’s numerous newspaper contribu-
                            tions are collected in several volumes (Ricci 1919, 1920, 1921, 1926). De
                            Stefani’s public speeches and press articles were collected by Treves (De
                            Stefani 1926b, 1927, 1928, 1929). Einaudi’s fervent activity as a journalist and
                            press editor is well known. When he first began to work for the Economist
                            in 1908, he was already co-editor of La Riforma Sociale, where in 1910 he
                            became editor in chief. Einaudi also wrote for La Stampa (1896–1902),
                            which he left to start a long collaboration with Il corriere della sera that
                            lasted until the end of 1925. As the Italian correspondent for the Econo-
                            mist, between 1920 and 1935 Einaudi published more than 220 articles, an
                            average of about 14 a year. The collection of his articles is republished in
                            Einaudi (1959–1965) and Einaudi (2000).
                        9   See the preface by Perfetti in De Stefani and Perfetti (2013, 5).
                       10   Upon his resignation, De Stefani continued to teach in Italian universi-
                            ties while remaining deeply involved in politics, observing political events
                            and writing in the main national press. In 1929 he was again nominated
                            for the Fascist Grand Council (Gran Consiglio del Fascismo), the main
                            governing body of Mussolini’s Fascist government. He lived a very long
                            life (1879–1969), and after the 1920s he abandoned his neoclassical-austere
                            perspective—and ultimately, economic science altogether (see Marcoaldi
                            1986, 55). On De Stefani’s life and career, see also the preface by Perfetti in
                            De Stefani and Perfetti (2013, 5–26).
                       11   Pure economics was the term the authors used to indicate the neoclassical
                            tradition of economics that stemmed from marginalism (what Dobb [1973]
                            calls the “Jevonian revolution,” from William Stanley Jevons). For a good
                            historical-theoretical analysis of the neoclassical theory, see Lunghini and
                            Lucarelli (2012).
                       12   Pareto is not one of the main figures in our story because he remained in
                            Switzerland during the first years of the Fascist regime (he died on Au-
                            gust 19, 1923). However, it goes without saying that, as a committed Fascist
                            and a prominent exponent of pure economics, Pareto held ideological and
                            theoretical sway over our economic experts and their austerity project, as
                            well as others among the Fascist and Liberal elites.
                       13   In the early 1900s Pantaleoni sat as a socialist in Parliament. His brief honey-
                            moon with the nascent socialist party was based on his belief that it was
                            the sole organized social force that protected free trade (Michelini 2020, 29;
                            see also Michelini 1998). These ideas were shared with Pareto and the other
                            pure economists, like Enrico Barone. However, by the early 1900s, when
                            the workers’ movement gained strength, Pareto, Pantaleoni, and Barone
                            stood fast in their objective to protect the bourgeois order and espoused
                            the nationalist cause: “the three pure economists saw first in nationalism
                            and then in fascism the political and social forces capable of engineering a
                            final showdown with both the socialist movement, be it reformist or revo-



                     372




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   372        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                notes to pages 209–210


                            lutionary, and weak Italian liberalism, which very timidly was opening up
                            to the logic of political and social democracy” (Michelini 2020, 30). Indeed,
                            through his interventions on La Politica, the official nationalist journal, Pan-
                            taleoni worked to expel all the “Left” and “eversive” residues of the Fascist
                            movement. On Pantaleoni’s and Pareto’s nationalism and their anti-Semitic
                            ideology together with Pantaleoni’s political career and journalistic activities,
                            see Michelini (2011a, 2019, 2020). Michelini (2011a) convincingly argues that
                            there was a continuity between Pantaleoni’s anti-Semitic polemics and his
                            anti-collectivist and anti-socialist polemics. Thus, the explanation of anti-
                            Semitism and Fascism cannot be considered as an external component with
                            respect to his theoretical economic analysis and especially his austere views.
                       14   Originally published in Il Giornale degli Economisti, April 1925.
                       15   ACS Segreteria Particolare del Duce, Carteggio Riservato, Cs b. 91, Um-
                            berto Ricci, June 1925.
                       16   Ricci began exposing the inefficiencies of the emerging corporativist economy
                            and the consequent abandonment of the free market. For instance, in one of
                            his first critical articles, “Sindacalismo giudicato da un economista” (Ricci
                            1926, 107–66). Ricci argued against both the role of unions in the labor
                            market and the abolition of private property in the name of collective entities
                            like Fascist corporations. His polemic reached its peak with the article “La
                            scienza e la vita” (Ricci 1928) in the journal Nuovi studi di diritto, economia e
                            politica, where he argued that the regime’s economic reforms did not comply
                            with “economic science” and especially austerity principles. In particular, he
                            criticized the interventionist measures embodied by the “battle of wheat”
                            whereby “farmers were forced to cultivate crops that were comparatively
                            more expensive” (1928, 223). He also denounced the protectionist turn of the
                            government that “prohibited industrialists from buying raw material from
                            abroad.” He further denounced rent control laws, “useless” public works, and
                            unemployment subsidies as well as migration and population control policies.
                       17   “La finanza dello stato egiziano nell’ultimo decennio,” in Studi economici
                            finanziari e corporativi 19, no. 3 (October 1941), published in Rome by Edi-
                            zioni Italiane [Mi sembrò allora opportuno di illuminare l’opinione pubblica
                            egiziana e tenni due conferenze, una alla società di economia politica e l’altra
                            all’università].
                       18   On June 10, 1924, Giacomo Matteotti, a young member of the Italian Par-
                            liament and secretary of the Italian Socialist Party, was kidnapped outside
                            his house by agents of the Fascist secret police (Ceka) that were under
                            Mussolini’s command. Two months later Matteotti’s body was found a few
                            kilometers outside Rome. The so-called Matteotti Affair gave rise to events
                            that resulted in the establishment of a totalitarian Fascist regime, forcing
                            Mussolini to reveal his inherently totalitarian ambitions and abandon the
                            pretense of “legality” that had marked the first two years of the Fascist gov-
                            ernment (1922–24). The so-called fascistissime laws that banned all political



                                                                                                         373




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   373        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 211–216


                            parties were the means by which Mussolini overcame the crisis the murder
                            precipitated. The Economist noted: “It is hard to see how [a] constitutional
                            Government—in the sense now generally accepted in Western society—
                            can be more than a name in a country where one political leader is able to
                            call up armed men, at a moment’s notice, to do his bidding” (“The Crisis in
                            Italy,” Economist, July 5, 1924, 11).
                       19   On Einaudi’s support of Fascism at least until 1924, see Faucci (1986,
                            194–211). Indeed, in the Economist, Einaudi’s writings focused exclusively
                            on Fascism’s economic policies, without any regard for the wider political
                            context. Still, in 1927 Einaudi was reporting positively on Italian economic
                            factors, glossing over any aspects that could have exposed the real authori-
                            tarian face of Fascist austerity. Among the many articles that reveal this
                            approach see “Italy—Mussolini’s Policy—Population and the Lira—Stock
                            Exchanges—Readjusting the Price Level—The Campaign for Reduction of
                            Prices,” Economist, June 11, 1927, 1236ff.; “Italy—Revaluation Policy and the
                            State Revenue—Appeals for Economy—Treasury Cash Funds—Increasing
                            Gold Reserves,” Economist, July 2, 1927, 22ff.
                       20   See for example Alesina’s influential intervention at the April 2010 Ecofin
                            council of Madrid called “Fiscal Adjustments: Lessons from Recent His-
                            tory” (Alesina 2010). We will discuss these episodes at length in chapter 10.
                            On the international political influence of the Bocconi graduates, see
                            Helgadóttir (2016, 392–409).
                       21   “Il programma finanziario del partito Nazional-Fascista, lettera aperta al
                            Senatore Luigi Einaudi,” Il popolo d’Italia, January 14, 1922.
                       22   Ricci’s scientific production takes three different forms: his reviews for
                            Il Giornale degli Economisti (he wrote in the section called “Rassegna
                            economica”); his lectures on political economy in Rome 1924–1925; and his
                            theoretical pieces—in particular, his two most famous works: Il Capitale
                            and I saggi sul Risparmio. Pantaleoni was a very prolific and complex
                            scholar; much ink has been spilled studying his thought, and many inter-
                            pretive controversies between scholars exist. The main point of divergence
                            is between those who understand Pantaleoni’s writings as substantially
                            unitary, and those who see a theoretical shift from his Principii to the
                            lectures he delivered in the early twentieth century (see Michelini 1998 and
                            Bini 2007). De Stefani was not an original contributor to pure economic
                            theory; his main contributions are cumbersome empirical studies (see for
                            example De Stefani 1925 and 1926a). Einaudi’s scientific work was more
                            applied in nature, especially regarding taxation and financial science. How-
                            ever, he expressed full consensus with the meta-economic approach of pure
                            economics.
                       23   For a critique of the newfound framework of the neoclassical school see
                            Dobb (1973, 166–211).




                     374




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   374        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 216–221


                       24   A deductivist logic is based on a small set of “axioms” (such as the rational
                            maximizing calculation) that produce an internally consistent framework
                            for explaining observed economic phenomena. The outcomes of these
                            abstract thought experiments lead to rigorous laws; given certain premises,
                            the fundamental economic theorems follow (Pantaleoni 1898, 3).
                       25   “Savers are necessary for production?” [I risparmiatori sono necessari
                            alla produzione?], Il corriere della sera, April 27, 1920, in Einaudi (1961,
                            vol. 5, 720).
                       26   The homo economicus acquires this virtue of saving only as a matter of ra-
                            tional economic calculations aimed at maximizing personal pleasure: “We
                            believe that the homo economicus compares present pleasure to future
                            satisfaction, properly reduced and discounted” (Ricci 1999, 22).
                       27   Pantaleoni’s elitist view is inseparable from his Social Darwinist perspec-
                            tive, by which in his lectures on political economy he teaches his students
                            that the economic qualities are innate and cannot be compensated for with
                            education or external factors. Inequality is explicitly a natural fact, and
                            a very healthy one for society. As he bluntly put it: “the most complex of
                            social organizations does not require any other condition than freedom of
                            action and choice in order to proceed with increasing virtue for the selec-
                            tive elimination of the incapable” (Pantaleoni 1922, 197). On Pantaleoni’s
                            Social Darwinist perspective, see Bini (2013) and Mosca (2015).
                       28   In macroeconomics today the identity of savings = investments (private
                            savings plus public savings) still holds true. In other words, there is no
                            hoarding of capital, since the assumption is that everything the business-
                            man invests finds a buyer. The debunking of Say’s law is foundational to
                            post-Keynesian and Marxian analysis today. See Blecker and Setterfield
                            (2019) and Shaikh (2016).
                       29   Italian Bolshevism—an epithet that was the title of Pantaleoni’s famous
                            booklet published in 1922—was loosely used to denote any state interven-
                            tion within the sphere of the market and any form of social redistribution.
                            Einaudi agreed that “socialism of whatever type was inevitably synony-
                            mous with reckless and pleasure-loving spirit, of a run towards immedi-
                            ate consumption, with demands of larger wages for less work” (Faucci
                            1986, 176).
                       30   According to Einaudi, during the war the Italian people could easily have
                            undertaken greater sacrifice than they did, especially through taxation,
                            thus avoiding debt and monetary inflation. As he wrote: “Our people did
                            not abandon immediately the arts of peace, did not renounce the habitual
                            pleasures [godimenti], did not deprive itself of the large part of its income
                            to throw it on the nation’s altar for the salvation of the army and the gran-
                            deur of the nation” (Einaudi 1933, 32).
                       31   Einaudi spoke of himself and his fellow economists as “we, first apostles of




                                                                                                      375




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   375        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 223–225


                            the Word of Abstinence” (Einaudi 1920, 173) [apostoli della prima ora del
                            verbo dell’astinenza]. For Einaudi, both during and after the war, savings led
                            to economic and moral redemption: “war imposes the necessity to observe
                            temperance and teaches how it is possible to live soberly, in a much nobler
                            manner than before” (Einaudi 1920, 120). Einaudi thought it “reasonable”
                            and “necessary” to “inculcate . . . in the Italian people the virtue of sacrifice,
                            the renunciation of all that is superfluous, of useless consumption” [incul-
                            care . . . agli italiani la virtù del sacrificio, della rinuncia a tutto cio’ che e’
                            superfluo, a tutti i consumi inutili] (“Abolire i Vincoli!” Il corriere della sera,
                            January 15, 1919, reprinted in Einaudi 1961, vol. 5, 43).
                       32   Pantaleoni (1922, 229). And again: “the traitors, the depressionists, the
                            saboteurs have to get caught and shot without pity. Otherwise we will have
                            the Soviets” [i traditori, i depressionisti, i sabotatori vanno senza pietà ac-
                            ciuffati e fucilati: altrimenti avremo i Soviet] (Pantaleoni 1917 in Michelini
                            2011a, 34). Referring to the heads of the Bolshevik movement, Pantaleoni
                            says: “It is obvious that between people who have such a morality and us
                            there cannot be but extermination war” (Pantaleoni 1918, 167, italics in
                            original).
                       33   Pantaleoni’s hatred toward socialism grew ever stronger after the Great
                            War, especially with the occupation of the factories in 1920. It was in these
                            years that La Vita Italiana—the nationalist-Fascist political journal that
                            Pantaleoni co-directed with Giovanni Preziosi—geared up its anti-Semitic
                            campaign. Michelini (2011a) shows how the anti-Semitism that many
                            Fascist intellectuals espoused was not biological but based on political
                            reasons: Jewish people were associated with an anti-capitalist conspiracy.
                            For example, Giovanni Preziosi wrote: “the biggest and most influential
                            demagogues and the most active agitators of the working classes are Jewish
                            or under Jewish influence” (Preziosi, in Michelini 2011b, 96). On the intrin-
                            sic connection between anti-socialism, anti-Semitism, and pure economics,
                            see Michelini (2011a).
                       34   Most scholars see De Stefani’s ministerial action as the emblem of the
                            normalization phase of Italian Fascism (Marcoaldi 1986, 18; Toniolo 1980,
                            50). However, the connection between austerity and an authoritarian
                            government reveals a deep ideological continuity between the so-called
                            normalizing austerity policies of the 1920s and the violent, anti-democratic
                            insurgency of the Fascist movement.
                       35   On the Fascist squads and their violent actions, see Vivarelli (1967) and
                            Tasca (1965).
                       36   Once he was appointed minister of finance in late November, De Stefani
                            received a letter from Mussolini asking him to also take up the post of min-
                            ister of treasury, pending the creation of a unified Ministry of Finance and
                            Treasury. De Stefani gave him a firm and austere reply: “Dear Mussolini,




                     376




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   376        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                 6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 225–227


                            I obey and I arrange for the fusion of the two ministries. In accepting, I
                            confide in your collaboration for the reduction of the expenditures of the
                            State. Faithfully yours” (Rome, December 20, 1922, De Stefani Archive, re-
                            printed in Marcoaldi 1986, 70). In the Economist Einaudi breathed a sigh of
                            relief: “it was high time that from the Government bench a voice should be
                            raised against the frenzied finance of the Bolshevist after-armistice period”
                            (“Italy—Absolute Government in Italy—Taxes to Be Simplified—Working
                            of the Succession Tax—A New Excise?” Economist, December 2, 1922,
                            1032ff.).
                       37   Certainly, Italy faced greater external constraints in debt repayment than
                            Britain due to its utter dependence on imports of food and raw materials.
                            On this dependence and how it exerted pressure in favor of austerity, see
                            chapter 8.
                       38   The postwar progressive tax reform was based on the idea that “these
                            necessary sacrifices will have to fall mainly on the shoulders of the wealthy
                            classes, and mostly on those who have derived big profits from the war,
                            while the new measures of taxation must weigh less heavily on the average
                            and lower middle classes, and only lightly or not at all on the labouring
                            classes” (Minister Carlo Schanzer’s statement on the financial situation
                            made in the Chamber of Deputies session of June 10, 1919, T 1/12367/35323,
                            24–25).
                       39   Giolitti announced the institution of a Parliamentary enquiry on war prof-
                            its in 1919, and it was instituted in 1920. De Stefani eventually disbanded
                            it and that prevented it from issuing an informative final report. Crocella
                            et al. (2002) reproduce the minutes and the material of the enquiry.
                       40   In June 1920, the deputy of the socialist party, Filippo Turati, gave a long
                            speech in Parliament in which he advocated for a system of inheritance
                            taxation based on the radical proposals of the engineer Eugenio Rignano
                            (1870–1930). Rignano adhered to the labor theory of value and argued that
                            the existing inheritance systems “tended to perpetuate the deprivation of
                            the working class and to confer an immortal character to the fortunes ac-
                            cumulated by the capitalist class.” On Rignano’s proposals and the debates
                            that it sparked, see Erreygers and Di Bartolomeo (2007).
                       41   “Il manifesto dei fasci di combattimento,” Il popolo d’Italia, June 6, 1919.
                       42   In that same budget speech, De Stefani could proudly assert that “the
                            country is now in a much better situation than it was seven months ago.
                            The country is at work, there are no labour disputes, unemployment is
                            decreasing, the balance of trade is improving, the amount of paper money
                            in circulation is tending to decrease. . . . The Government has shown that
                            it respects labour but it does not intend to persecute capital” (Summary of
                            Financial Statement, Milan, May 13, 1923, FO 371/8887, fol. 13).
                       43   Other measures encouraged foreign capital to invest in Italy: debts con-




                                                                                                     377




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   377        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 227–228

                            tracted abroad now could be deducted from the ricchezza mobile; and the
                            Ministry of Finance could grant exemptions on incomes subject to double
                            taxation, at home and in foreign countries (Forsyth 1993, 275). For other
                            measures in favor of capital such as the liberalization of financial markets,
                            see Rossi (1955, 75–90) and Guarneri (1953).
                       44   The Italian taxation system was of course much more regressive than the
                            British one, since the majority of the state revenue came from indirect
                            taxes. De Stefani’s reforms meant a further regressive push to an already
                            regressive system. For details on the Italian fiscal system after World War I
                            see Forsyth (1993).
                       45   The workers now had to pay 12.4 percent in tax on all their belongings, while
                            farmers holding land on certain types of tenures [coloni, coloni parziari]
                            started paying a 10 percent income tax rate (Royal Decree 16, January 14,
                            1923, in Toniolo 1980, 47). Public employees also became liable (Royal De-
                            cree 1660, December 16, 1922, in GU 305 [December 30, 1922], and Royal De-
                            cree 1661, December 21, 1922, in GU 305 [December 30, 1922], 9934).
                       46   In 1924, the British embassy transmitted two copies of the publications
                            issued by the Ministry of Finance called “Fascist Financial Policy” which
                            stated: “the number of income tax payers has increased from 600,000 to
                            700,000. The entry on the roll of contributors of labourers hereto exempt
                            from taxation . . . has increased the number by another 100,000 to which
                            must be added a further 1,250,000 through the application of this tax to
                            incomes derived from farming” (Ettore Rosboch, Rome 1924, FO 371/9936,
                            fol. 35 [p. 11]).
                       47   Tax breaks were granted also to the proceeds of administrators of joint
                            stock companies; to the proceeds of directors and procurers of commercial
                            firms; on dividends, interest, and bonuses of securities issued by non-
                            government bodies; and on the imposta complementare on income above
                            10,000 lire (Toniolo 1980, 47).
                       48   The nominatività dei titoli was a measure approved in Italy after the Great
                            War, to make it possible to link capital incomes to individual taxpayers and
                            subject them to a personal, progressive income tax (Manestra 2010, 28).
                       49   Inheritance tax provided the state with revenue of 305 million in 1922–1923.
                            When De Stefani’s law exempted 65 percent of inheritance from taxation,
                            the revenue went down to 72 million by 1925–1926 (La Francesca 1972, 10).
                            With the new law, only transfers outside the family (defined as “ascendants,
                            descendants, spouses, siblings, uncles/aunts, nephews/nieces”) were taxed
                            (Gabbuti 2020a, 16). Pantaleoni prepared the study of inheritance tax for
                            De Stefani that reached the following conclusion: “it is desirable to arrive
                            by degrees to the abolishment of inheritance tax” [è perciò opportuno ar-
                            rivare per gradi alla soppressione totale della imposta successoria] (see Ricci
                            1939, 94). On the abolition of the inheritance tax and the support of the
                            Fascist and liberal press, see Gabbuti (2021).




                     378




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   378        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 229–231


                       50   Brosio and Marchese (1986) provide data even more stark than those in
                            Ragioneria Generale dello Stato (RGS, 2011). They show that redistributive
                            expenditures dropped more than three times from 1922 to 1924 (from 6,664
                            million lire to 1,911 million lire). If after World War I redistributive expen-
                            ditures had quickly increased to reach 26 percent of total public spending
                            in 1921, they were cut back to 11 percent by 1923 (elaborations from the data
                            in Brosio and Marchese 1986, tables 1A and 4A).
                       51   “In February 1923, the state raised the degree of disability that farm work-
                            ers had to demonstrate in order to obtain compensation for work-related
                            injuries from 10 percent to 15 percent. These measures had reversed the
                            extension of Giolitti in 1921. The right to indemnity shrank to include
                            workers age 12 to 65 instead of 9 to 75 as provided by the Gilittian reforms.
                            The reform also made mezzadri and tenant farmers responsible for paying
                            a portion of the contributions that up to then had been entirely covered by
                            their employers. By 1925, the Cassa Nazionale Infortuni reported that their
                            contributions fell by 43 percent” (Pavan 2019, 866).
                       52   By the end of 1923, the state’s yearly contribution to unemployment insur-
                            ance was suspended (Royal Decree 3184, December 30, 1923, in GU 40
                            [February 16, 1924]). Most importantly, its mandatory nature—the true
                            achievement of the many popular movements just a few years prior—was
                            trashed. Moreover, farm workers, domestic staff, and home workers were
                            exempt from insurance obligations. Pavan comments: “The most innova-
                            tive feature of the Italian laws, which were the first in the world to envision
                            unemployment insurance even for farm workers, was erased” (Pavan
                            2019, 867).
                       53   Rassegna della previdenza sociale vol. 6 (1923): 120. The ministry would be
                            rehabilitated only after 1945. In the 1920s the Fascist regime even abolished
                            the Superior council of labor, a symbol of liberal reformism that since the
                            beginning of the century guaranteed participation of workers’ organiza-
                            tions in the activities of the State.
                       54   Elaborations from Ragioneria Generale dello Stato (RGS 2011). The pri-
                            mary surplus was maintained throughout the decade, and public expen-
                            diture (not counting expenditure defense and interest payment) lingered
                            below 20 percent until the big escalation of the Ethiopian war in 1935.
                       55   Social expenditure lagged at around the 1931 level (1.2 percent of nominal
                            GDP) until 1936, when it jumped up to almost 2 percent. These were the
                            years of the Ethiopian war, when total public spending jumped to 37.9
                            percent in 1935 and 44.9 percent in 1936.
                       56   See Toniolo (1980, 53–58).
                       57   See for example OXFAM, October 12, 2020, “IMF Paves Way for New Era
                            of Austerity post–COVID-19,” https://www.oxfam.org/en/press-releases/
                            imf-paves-way-new-era-austerity-post-covid-19.
                       58   This campaign against what Pantaleoni called “Italian Bolshevism” encom-



                                                                                                       379




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   379        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 231–233


                            passed the formidable polemic against the so-called bardature di guerra,
                            literally “war harnesses”—a term that purposefully signaled a cumbersome
                            and nagging impediment. See for example Einaudi, “Abolire i Vincoli!”
                            January 15, 1919, in Einaudi (1961, vol. 5, p. 43).
                       59   As Ricci put it, “it must be those men capable of producing and interested
                            in producing are not chased away [scacciati] and tormented by govern-
                            ment” (Ricci 1920a, 8).
                       60   In May 1923 the public works budget was cut by a quarter, and De Stefani
                            could announce that it would be “limited to those works that cannot be
                            deferred, to avoid the deterioration of works already begun” (De Stefani
                            1926b, 214).
                       61   These policies widely satisfied the spirit of retaliation of Liberal public
                            opinion. In the words of Federico Flora, who would join the board of
                            directors of the State Railways in 1925, the personnel had been “ruined”
                            [rovinato] by “the factious propaganda of thousands of agents: Russian and
                            Red” [propaganda faziosa di centinaia di agenti, russi e rossi] (Flora 1923,
                            28). Among many other economists, Giorgio Mortara was of the same
                            opinion: “performance has diminished due to the spirit of indiscipline and
                            negligence that looms over the railway workers” [ma ancora più il rendi-
                            mento è diminuito per lo spirito di indisciplina e di negligenza che aleggia fra
                            gli agenti ferroviari] (Mortara 1922, 298).
                       62   Letter of Sir R. Graham to Marques Kurzon of Kedleston, December 22,
                            1922, FO 371/7651, fol. 265 [p. 2]; on austerity in the railways see also report
                            received on November 5, 1922, FO 371/8886, fol. 57.
                       63   Third-class ticket prices increased 15 percent, and second-class prices
                            increased by 6 percent, while first-class tickets were unchanged (Toniolo
                            1980, 50). The state reduced investment in railway track maintenance,
                            thereby dismissing the least profitable lines and impeding their modern-
                            ization. All these measures helped to improve the budget: in 1924–1925
                            railways realized a profit of 175.8 million lire compared to the year ending
                            June 30, 1922, in which they had a deficit of 1,258 million lire (ibid., 49–50).
                            The priority of orthodox finance implied that the state gave up on a crucial
                            task of improving the country’s infrastructure.
                       64   Our experts undertook a ferocious campaign against municipal companies
                            for the management of public utilities. Speaking about his experience as fi-
                            nance minister in the city of Fiume, Pantaleoni suggested that “the services of
                            drinking water, tramways, gas and electrical lighting were in deficit and only
                            because [they were] managed by the state” (Pantaleoni 1922, Preface, xxx).
                       65   “Postal strikes would become impossible if the government stopped
                            defending state monopoly and prohibiting the private sector, i.e., the as-
                            sociations of merchants and industrialists, from organizing a private postal
                            service, an organization that would be in place in less than 24 hours and in
                            much more perfect form than the public one” (Pantaleoni 1922, 233).



                     380




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   380        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 234–236


                       66   “Labour has a final degree of utility of its own, just like any other direct
                            commodity . . . and as to the causes affecting its disposable quantity, are
                            intimately connected with the merceological [commodified] nature of
                            labour” (Pantaleoni 1898, 285).
                       67   Legal protection of labor was obviously the primary threat to the optimal
                            and harmonious model. “If by law or any other artifice one could make
                            it such that the worker could work 8 instead of 9 hours, there would be
                            no obstacle that could impede the reduction of the working day and the
                            increase of wages” (Pantaleoni 1910, 212). In the Economist Einaudi had la-
                            mented that “An application of the policy of the eight-hours’ day, and of the
                            weekly rest, by which the hours of effective work were sometimes reduced
                            to two or three hours a day, is largely responsible for this lamentable state
                            of affairs; but lack of discipline contributed no less to it” (December 31,
                            1923, in Einaudi 2000, 270).
                       68   Writing in the Economist in 1926, Einaudi explained the details of the Bill
                            on Industrial Disputes that followed the pact of Palazzo Vidoni, extolling
                            “its far-reaching importance.” Einaudi laid bare the features of the corpo-
                            ratist authoritarian state, but he did so without any critical tone. He instead
                            offered a sober description that pointed to a fundamental success: strikes
                            had been defeated. “One of the cardinal principles of the Fascist program
                            was indeed the elimination of industrial disputes. In fact, strikes, which
                            were rampant in the postwar years (18,887,917 days lost in industry in 1919
                            and 16,398,227 in 1920), had diminished to 7,772,870 days lost in 1921 and
                            6,276,565 in the first ten months of 1922. But if the decrease in the spirit of
                            unrest was already sensible, it is only after October 1922 that the number of
                            days lost became almost negligible: 309,670 in the last two months of 1922,
                            295,929 in 1923, and 1,159,271 in 1924. In agriculture strikes have almost
                            disappeared. Fascism has always aimed at suppressing class-feuds and
                            replacing industrial struggles with co-operation between capital and labor.
                            The Bill . . . will put on the statute-book the principles which were hitherto
                            the practical policy of the present government. . . . Only those employers
                            or employees can be admitted as members of the recognized associations
                            who have a good political record from the national point of view. This
                            aims at excluding from membership followers of subversive political and
                            social creeds” (“Italy—The Bill on Industrial Disputes—Its Far-Reaching
                            Importance—Reform of the Senate,” Economist, January 9, 1926, 64).
                       69   Chamberlain received a summary of the Labour Charter on February 21,
                            1927 (FO 371/12202, fol. 80). (On corporativism and the functions of the
                            new labor magistracy, see ibid., fol. 89.)
                       70   “According to the [corporative] system, denoted as ‘corporativismo,’ the
                            conflicting interests of employers and employees had to be reconciled with
                            the supreme interests of the state.” Corporativism was initially created
                            through an agreement signed on October 2, 1925, between the representa-



                                                                                                       381




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   381        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 236–237


                            tives of Italian industrialists and the representatives of Fascist trade unions
                            and was then codified in a series of laws approved in 1926. (These laws are
                            Law no. 563, April 3, 1926, in GU 87 [April 14, 1926]; Royal Decree 1130,
                            July 1, 1926, in GU 155 [July 7, 1926], 2930; and Royal Decree 1131, July 2,
                            1926, in GU 155 [July 7, 1926], 2941.) For the legal aspects of the system see
                            Balandi and Vardaro (1988). The Fascist regime was an authoritarian cor-
                            porativism where the representation of workers’ interests was only formal,
                            not substantial, given the absence of freedom of association and the state’s
                            power to nominate the representatives of the Fascist union. The relation
                            between capital and labor moreover was regulated within the fixed objec-
                            tives of the regime’s austerity policies. On the other hand, the employer’s
                            association [confindustria] was capable of maintaining its autonomy at least
                            till the mid-1930s.
                       71   “La carta del lavoro di 1927,” Article 6, Gazzetta ufficiale 68, no. 100
                            (April 30, 1927): 1795.
                       72   He explicitly wrote: “it is enough to start from the non-controversial
                            premise in pure economics that the hypothesis of unlimited free competi-
                            tion gives the optimal wage solution. Starting from such a premise, the
                            policy-maker can legitimately try to achieve with different means (a judge’s
                            decision, an agreement between associations, etc.) this same optimal solu-
                            tion in the cases where the hypothesis of free unlimited competition does
                            not operate and thus cannot deliver the optimal effects.”
                       73   “La carta del lavoro di 1927,” Article 2, Gazzetta ufficiale 68, no. 100
                            (April 30, 1927): 1794.
                       74   The Bedaux system had already been extensively experimented with in
                            Britain. By 1937, 49 Italian and 225 British firms had incorporated this
                            practice (Kreis 1990, 280). The Bedaux system consisted of a wage incentive
                            scheme “based upon the scientific measurement of human labor” (ibid.,
                            324) that could track effort expended by the worker and could rank their
                            efficiency, speed up production, and eliminate idle time.
                       75   Michelini (2019 and 2020) provides a good overview of the two main
                            strands that characterize the economic culture of Fascism: the one inspired
                            by Pantaleoni’s pure economics, and the other inspired by Alfredo Rocco’s
                            New-Mercantilist/Corporativist school. The two schools of thought shared
                            an anti-democratic and anti-socialist stance, and a rebuttal of any au-
                            tonomy of workers’ organizations in production, thus marginalizing the
                            revolutionary syndicalist component of early Fascism. While the latter
                            corporativist strand became more prominent in the late 1920s, the pure
                            economics strand of Pantaleoni remained influential, even within the cor-
                            porativist tradition itself, as is evident in the debates on the significance of
                            the 1927 Labour Charter. For example, Michelini (2020) points to the fact
                            that the pure economist Gustavo Del Vecchio opposed those who saw the
                            Labour Charter as giving real power to the Fascist trade union. Instead, he



                     382




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   382        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                      notes to page 237


                            greeted it “as a historical embodiment of the economic principles enunci-
                            ated by Pantaleoni focused on the exaltation of innovative entrepreneurs”
                            (Del Vecchio 1929; Michelini 2020, 26). Many Fascist intellectuals agreed.
                            The Fascist and corporativist theoretician Carlo Costamagna, for example,
                            insistently underlined how the Labour Charter safeguarded private initia-
                            tive (see Costamagna 1931). Corporativisim, he remarked, “is an instru-
                            ment, not an end.” Most importantly, “the premise of the new national eco-
                            nomic order rests within the individual, within private initiative,” which is
                            the “cornerstone of the Fascist constitution” (Costamagna 1933, 1–3). Gino
                            Arias, another Fascist corporativist, firmly distinguished Fascist corpora-
                            tivism from state socialism. The former understood private initiative as the
                            “strongest . . . basis for any productive initiative” and implied “a sponta-
                            neous self-discipline” of the workers to achieve “economic equilibrium”
                            (Arias 1929, 371). Indeed, “to the corporation can be assigned the serious
                            and efficacious protection of the superior interest of production against
                            the egoisms of the unions” (ibid.). The Fascist politician and economist
                            Ettore Rosboch, who had worked closely with De Stefani’s ministry, also
                            agreed. In 1930, Rosboch noted that the increasing public intervention in
                            economics was still about prioritizing private property, and not at all about
                            subordinating it to separate priorities of the state: “The economic function
                            of the Fascist state has the well-defined task of integrating and developing
                            as much as possible the productive activity of the private sector” (Rosboch
                            1930, 254). This evidence further corroborates our thesis of continuity be-
                            tween austerity and corporativist institutions such as the Labour Charter.
                       76   In the Economist Einaudi commented that “the most interesting sections
                            of the Charter are those which aim at giving a practical scope to general
                            principles,” with the principle of the conciliation of “capital and labor un-
                            der the supreme authority of the state, in the interest of the nation at large,”
                            taking precedence. He quoted: “Private initiative and labor are forces which
                            must be guided and conciliated by the state in the interest of maximum
                            production. But the state, and the Fascist state primarily, cannot recognize
                            as legal organizations of employers and employed which aim at subvert-
                            ing it.” Thus, the expulsion of non-Fascist unions (“Italy’s Labour Charter,”
                            Economist, May 14, 1927, 1008ff.).
                       77   “La carta del lavoro di 1927,” Article 7, in GU 68, no. 100 (April 30, 1927):
                            1795.
                       78   The historian Jon S. Cohen concludes his classic article on the battle of the
                            lira with the following remarks: “When the [Fascist] government became
                            directly involved in the private sector in the 1920s and 1930s, the motiva-
                            tion was to protect and support private interests, not to usurp their control.
                            There was no conflict of interest between Italian fascism and Italian capital-
                            ism” (Cohen 1972, 654). In line with this argument, Michelini (2020, 41–49)
                            demonstrates that many economists writing in the Fascist journals inter-



                                                                                                        383




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   383        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 237–239


                            preted state interventionism in labor relations and state interventionism
                            in production to boost economic growth as measures that would protect
                            capitalism from socialist and redistributive ideas.
                       79   Contemporaries believed the drop in wages was even greater. Buozzi
                            remarked that by the 1930s “the overall nation-wide reduction of real
                            wages could be considered to be 15-40 with respect to 1920–1921” (Buozzi
                            1972, 428). Gaetano Salvemini also wrote “we arrive at the conclusion that
                            between 1926 and 1934 workers in industry lost an average of 40 to 50 of
                            their wages” (Salvemini 1936, 253). Real annual wages reached their histori-
                            cal minimum in 1936 due to the inflationary wave sparked by the war
                            against Ethiopia and the international sanctions that followed. In 1936 real
                            wages dropped by almost 20 percent from 1921 levels—decreasing from
                            17.34 lire in 1921 to 13.98 lire in 1936 (daily real wages at lira 1938; Zamagni
                            1975, Table 1 and 3). Scholars have discussed how the introduction of the
                            family check starting from 1934 had very little effect on the worker’s living
                            standard (see Zamagni 1975, 541).
                       80   In Cotula and Spaventa (1993, 579).
                       81   Pantaleoni (1922, 38).
                       82   Restrictive debt management policy was indispensable to diminishing the
                            liquidity in the economy. On November 6, 1926, the bills outstanding at
                            that date were long-term government bonds with no maturity which paid
                            5 percent. Between June 1926 and May 1927, the state reduced the value of
                            short-term debt held by the public and the banking system from 27 billion
                            lire to 6 billion lire. The refunding operation was successful, and liquidity
                            was cut (Cohen 1972, 649). Following the British procedure, the Fascist
                            regime introduced a sinking fund in August 1927 (FO 371/12947, fol. 162).
                            This permitted consolidation of the floating debt whereby the five- and
                            seven-year Treasury bonds were converted into the longer-term “littorio
                            loans” (on November 6, 1926, “conversione forzosa”). The littorio loans
                            represented a popular “effort” [sforzo] that attracted the small savers for
                            the national “economic battle” [battaglia economica] (Volpi, in Cotula and
                            Spaventa 1993, 588).
                       83   “Italian Finance,” The Times, April 9, 1925, 9. See also “Ministerial Changes
                            in Italy,” The Times, July 13, 1925, 15.
                       84   For a similar diagnosis stressing the solidity of the Italian fundamentals,
                            see “Italian Finance,” The Times, April 9, 1925, 9; “Fall of the Lira,” The
                            Times, June 19, 1925, 15; “Italian Bank Rate Increased,” The Times, June 18,
                            1925, in OV 36/22. On speculation as a reason for a drop in the value of
                            the lira during the exchange rate crisis of summer 1925, see also Einaudi’s
                            account, “Italy—The Foreign Exchanges Scare—Extraordinary Payments
                            for Wheat—Paper Issues Stationary—The Inter-Allied Debt Problem”
                            Economist, July 18, 1925, 107ff.
                       85   De Stefani, The Times notes, had acted egregiously in moving toward fulfill-



                     384




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   384        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 240–241

                            ment of his financial promises: “Two of the first promises of the Fascist
                            government on its accession to power were to balance the budget and to
                            improve by 50 percent the value of the lira. The advance made during the
                            last two years towards the fulfilment of the first promise has been sufficient
                            to dispel all doubt as to the possibility of its ultimate attainment” (“Ital-
                            ian Finance,” The Times, April 9, 1925, 9). The excessive monetary rigor
                            and “Bourse regulations and measures” with which De Stefani confronted
                            the fall in the value of the lira had the opposite impact of aggravating the
                            financial crisis and the depreciation of the lira, and he was thus forced to
                            resign (“Italian Ministers Resign,” The Times, July 9, 1925, 14). De Stefani
                            resigned on July 9, 1925. Einaudi, who reported the resignation in the
                            Economist, paid high tribute to his colleague for his impressive austerity
                            record, and even noted how his resignation had to do with “a well-meant
                            endeavor to revalue the lira” that “shook financial markets” (see “Italy—
                            Resignation of Signor De Stefani—Public Finance—Stock Markets—Duty
                            on Cereals—Wholesale Prices,” Economist, August 15, 1925, 270ff.). Volpi
                            praised De Stefani as a name to be “written in the annals of Italian finance
                            as the restorer of budget equilibrium” (“Italian Financial Policy,” The Times,
                            July 14, 1925, 13; also see OV 36/22, fol. 36).
                       86   For example, the difficulty in selling grain abroad caused independent
                            farmers of the Padania plain to suffer from hunger, thus forcing them to
                            adhere to the centralized migration plan of the regime to recolonize the
                            area of the Agro-Pontino in the Lazio Region. Pennacchi’s historical novel,
                            Canale Mussolini, provides a vivid picture of such a dramatic episode.
                       87   “Italy—Stock Exchange Situation—Unemployment—Foreign Trade—New
                            Issues and Savings—Bank Balance Sheets,” Economist, January 8, 1927, 68ff.
                       88   See Daily Telegraph, “Italy’s War Debt,” June 19, 1925, in OV 36/22, fol. 30.
                            The official discount rates were fixed by decree by the minister of treasury
                            and finance.
                       89   “Italian Finance,” The Times, April 9, 1925, 9, or see OV 36/22, fol. 23. The
                            article reported on the deflationary measures that were undertaken to halt
                            devaluation. In De Stefani’s own words: “It is essential that Italy, by taking
                            adequate precautions and at the cost of inevitable though temporary sacri-
                            fices, should recover the control of her own currency . . . and it is towards
                            the accomplishment of this end that the financial policy of the Government
                            is now directed.”
                       90   This same speech was also reported in the Economist: “The Stabilisation of
                            the Lira,” Economist, December 31, 1927, 1179ff.
                       91   “Everyone must be convinced that re-evaluation has exigencies that are
                            so vast as to require financial policy to be subordinated to them in order
                            to avoid the assessment crisis that re-evaluation may entail” (De Stefani
                            1928, 151).
                       92   The immediate action for revaluation consisted in increasing the demand




                                                                                                      385




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   385        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to page 241

                            for the lira on the international market. To this end the Italian state pur-
                            chased lira with its international currency. Exports were therefore crucial
                            to generate a reserve inflow to maintain Italian foreign monetary reserves.
                       93   “Financial and Economic Situation in Italy,” August 6, 1926, FO 371/11387,
                            fol. 153.
                       94   By July 1926 Volpi could write to Mussolini satisfied that “the budget of
                            the state clear and devoid of any possibility of criticism will at the end of
                            the financial year 1925-1926 triplie the estimated surplus, bringing it up to
                            beyond one billion two million lire” (July 13, 1926, FO 371/11387, fol. 129).
                            Volpi exceeded his own expectations. The League of Nations and the Bank
                            of England were quickly informed that he had realized a surplus of 417 mil-
                            lion lira in 1924–25 and a surplus of 2,268 million lira in 1925–26 (January
                            27, 1928, OV 36/22, fol.123A, 2).
                       95   For example, the letter that the representatives of the cotton industry sent
                            to Mussolini on December 20, 1926, read: “The industrialists find them-
                            selves facing a crisis and have suspended any new plant or technical im-
                            provement, or more generally, any expense that is not strictly pertinent to
                            production. They have already been forced to reduce the weekly wages of
                            their workers significantly. They now present to the government the need
                            to decrease, by January, the basis of pay in the amount necessary to adjust
                            the new monetary basis with the cost of production, and thus of the prices
                            of sale” (ACS, Carte Volpi, fase. 49, in Cotula and Spaventa 1993, 597).
                       96   As Einaudi put it in the Economist: “A rearrangement, however, of internal
                            costs of production is clearly due if Italian industry wishes to hold its
                            hard-won ground in foreign markets. Hence the campaign started by the
                            government, the corporations (employers’ and employees’ syndicates),
                            and the press for the reduction of salaries, wages, rents, and prices”
                            (“Italy—Mussolini’s Policy—Population and the Lira—Stock Exchanges—
                            Readjusting the Price Level—The Campaign for Reduction of Prices,” Econ-
                            omist, June 11, 1927, 1236ff.). Similarly, in September 1927 Einaudi spoke of
                            a good balance of payments and of the nonexistence of idle savings thanks
                            to the fact that, unlike Britain, the corporativist state was already estab-
                            lished. He wrote: “The real point of interest in the economic policy of Italy
                            is the method adopted for reaching the new equilibrium of price, incomes,
                            wages, public revenue, &c. . . . The true agency working for a new equi-
                            librium is the idea of the ‘Corporate State’” that amongst other things was
                            setting the price of labor (“Italy—Sinking Fund for Public Debt—Imports
                            and Exports Figures—Towards a New Economic Equilibrium,” Economist,
                            September 17, 1927, 482ff.).
                       97   Favero (2010) stresses that the decision of the Fascist state to fix a 20
                            percent generalized reduction in the country’s nominal wages was based
                            on a calculation of the consumer price index (CPI) by ISTAT (Italian
                            National Institute of Statistics) that was manipulated downward. The use of




                     386




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   386        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 242–248


                            ISTAT’s data was the result of an agreement between the government and
                            Confindustria whereby the government committed to calculating a CPI
                            based on the prices of the industries’ own stores [spacci operai contenuti
                            nella fabbrica], which were lower than market prices. Favero notes how
                            this technique justified a further state-enforced wage cut of 8 percent in
                            November 1930 (2010, 328).
                       98   In May 1927, the General Fascist Confederation of Industry spoke clearly of
                            the perpetual relation between the gold standard and industrial austerity. It
                            announced to “the Italian workmen, with a praiseworthy spirit of disci-
                            pline,” a “general reduction of industrial wages—a step which seems indeed
                            to be unavoidable if the exchange value of the lira is to be maintained at
                            a rate about 30 percent higher than recent averages” (May 20, 1927, FO
                            371/12202, fol. 128).
                       99   Increases in unemployment were also attested in a document from the
                            Bank of England (OV 9/440, fol. 30). The British embassy reported that the
                            revaluation of the lira “caused general dislocation in nearly all branches of
                            trade and industry,” and that this depression had begun in 1926 and pro-
                            gressed in 1927 (Summary of Board of Trade Report on the Economic Situ-
                            ation in Italy during 1927, April 1928, OV 36/1). Even with the recovery of
                            1929, the index of industrial employment was still 3 percent below the level
                            of 1925–26 (Toniolo 1980, 131). Official unemployment was at 10 percent of
                            the industrial labor force (Cohen 1972, 649).
                      100   For example, the corporativist economist Gino Arias described the 1929
                            episode as “a crisis of overconsumption” (Arias 1931) brought about by high
                            salaries, the “unpredictability of the working classes,” financial speculation,
                            and “the unlimited increase in production and wealth” with “the most open
                            violation of all the most elementary norms of public and private moral-
                            ity” (Arias 1933, 216, in Michelini 2020, 42–43). The editorial board of the
                            Fascist journal Lo Stato composed of prominent economists agreed that the
                            crisis was brought upon by an international “abuse of credit.” By contrast,
                            the economic policy of Fascism stood out, as it “adopted from the begin-
                            ning a policy of austere realism” (Direzione 1931, in Michelini 2020, 49).
                            On those pages Giuseppe Ugo Papi argued that that the economic policy
                            of the corporativist “controlled economy” would translate into a rapid
                            reduction of all revenues, taking care to also reduce public spending and to
                            maintain the state budget in balance (Papi 1931, in Michelini 2020, 49).



                     Chapter Eight

                        1   Like many others, Niemeyer knew that British loans to Italy would provide
                            the country with the means to buy British commodities, and thus that the
                            economic impact of such loans should not be underestimated. He was



                                                                                                       387




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   387        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 248–252


                            well aware of the connection between loans to Italy and increased British
                            exports to Italy when he reported to the Macmillan Committee in June
                            1930, “I am inclined to believe that on the whole foreign lending does not
                            seriously outrun the constable, and in that case is greatly to our advan-
                            tage. For the greater part loans mean orders direct or indirect . . . even
                            stabilization loans which preserve order are fairly in the interest of British
                            trade” (G1/428). In 1919 Rodney Rodd of the British embassy was of the
                            same opinion: “But generally it seems to me that the question of extend-
                            ing further credits to Italy in a moment of great financial difficulty should
                            be considered not only from the point of view of liquidating debts already
                            incurred towards Great Britain, but also from the point of view of the
                            future development of British trade in this country, in the interest of which
                            the stability of Italian finance cannot be disregarded” (February 7, 1919,
                            FO 371/3808).
                        2   For an analysis of the trade figures see Luigi Einaudi, “Italy—The Direction
                            of Foreign Trade—Revival of Trade Unions Movement—Fascist Corpora-
                            tions and Class Federations,” Economist, December 13, 1924, 964.
                        3   See Carlo Schanzer, “Statement on the Financial Situation,” made in the
                            chamber of deputies sitting in June 10, 1919, Rome in T1/12367/35323.
                        4   James Rennell Rodd’s letter to Earl George Nathaniel Curzon on April 2,
                            1919, FO 608/38/15, fol. 449.
                        5   The February loan was used primarily for paying all outstanding debts to
                            British departments for services rendered to the Italian government prior
                            to February 1, 1919. On the February agreements see also T 1/12343/8035/19.
                            It is worth noting that monetary austerity in Britain could affect the
                            amount of the Italian loan. On June 16, 1920, the Italian chargé d’affaires,
                            Gabriele Preziosi, wrote in a preoccupied tone to Chancellor Neville
                            Chamberlain: “When the agreement of 8th of August 1919 was negotiated
                            the bank rate had kept steady for a long time at 5 percent. Afterwards it
                            rose to 6 percent and recently to 7 percent, causing a considerably larger
                            increase of the debt of the Italian Treasury” (T 160/10/12, fol. 3). The British
                            government consented to fix a uniform rate at 5 percent interest for all
                            renewals of Italian bills.
                        6   The commercial counselor ended the report with this bleak judgment: “I
                            can only say that it is my firm belief, after more than 30 years of close study
                            of this country, that the Italians are, at the moment, not exaggerating their
                            necessities and that the dangers which confront this country are of the
                            most serious nature possible” (T 1/12551, 7).
                        7   Hambling’s memo, which was kept by the British Treasury, read: “Respon-
                            sible people in Italy are convinced (and from my knowledge of Italy, which
                            I have visited on several occasions during the War, I feel certain they are
                            right) that there is very serious risk owing to the present conditions in




                     388




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   388        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 252–254


                            Italy of an enormous political upheaval unless they are allowed in some
                            way to obtain the essential imports for their industries in order that their
                            people may continue in employment. The cost of living there has reached
                            such limits that the people are extremely restive and any lack of employ-
                            ment would probably result in revolution and bolshevism. This country
                            has already lent Italy about 400 million sterling and it would seem almost
                            a necessity for us to give them the further assistance they now require for
                            a period of two years, in order to protect the amount we have already at
                            stake. I am aware that in the city of London at the present time there are
                            certain prominent people who are of opinion that England cannot afford
                            now to give long credits to other countries but the danger of unrest among
                            peoples is very great and any trouble in Italy might quickly spread. . . . I do
                            think our refusal to assist Italy at the present time might have serious con-
                            sequences” (T 1/12367/35323, memorandum from Sir Herbert Hambling).
                        8   Political pressures that opposed welfare cuts were especially troubling: “the
                            head of an English bank had told me,” Capel-Cure reported, “the adverse
                            point which made a special impression on financial circles in the city of
                            London was that the Italian government had been forced to yield to the
                            clamour of the socialists in their attempt to take off the subsidy now given
                            on bread” (April 12, 1920, T 1/12551/4).
                        9   Similar lamentations against the government’s financial and economic pol-
                            icy sparked from the Italian Confederation of Industry. The motion of the
                            executive committee “pointed out that the policy of the financial authori-
                            ties, of the Treasury, and of the Public Services, would appear to render the
                            situation more difficult by taxation, unequalled in any other country, which
                            absorbs capital as well as interest, rendering saving impossible and thereby
                            thwarting the flow of new capital into productive channels” (“Industry
                            and Production: Motion of Executive Committee on the Confederation of
                            Industry,” April 6, 1922, FO 371/7656, fol. 156).
                       10   Internal actors of course agreed. Nitti, for example, on March 12, 1922,
                            urged the implementation of the principles of British legislation “by
                            renouncing all adventurous policies” (FO 371/7669, fol. 201). “Everyone
                            recognizes,” he continued, “that there is only one means of salvation, to
                            return to the habit of saving.” Just like those of his fellow economists we
                            studied in chapter 7, Nitti bemoaned the lack of austere virtue: “neither the
                            state, nor the local bodies, nor private individuals, save. The State, indeed,
                            sets the bad example of squandering” (ibid., fol. 198).
                       11   See for example “Investment of Foreign Capital in Italy,” dispatch by Am-
                            bassador Graham, November 11, 1922, FO 371/7656, fols. 292–293. A month
                            later, the Economist reported that the royal decree of December 16, 1922
                            (Royal Decree Law 1660, in GU 305 [December 30, 1922]) exempted from
                            income tax all loans issued in foreign countries for the purpose of import-




                                                                                                       389




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   389        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 254–257


                            ing new capital into Italy. See also: “Italy—Restriction on Sale of Occupied
                            Houses—Exemption from Taxes to Foreign Loans—Succession Duty—
                            Increase of Failures,” Economist, August 25, 1923, 298.
                       12   The estimated reduction was 254 million lire. “Succession Duty in Italy,”
                            The Times, August 21, 1923, 7.
                       13   December 27, 1923, FO 371/8887, fols. 76–77. The dispatch reported the
                            words of the minister of national economy, Orso Mario Corbino.
                       14   Another article in The Times, titled “Bold Italian Finance,” praised the
                            pledge of the Fascist government to reduce the deficit to zero by 1925,
                            a hard task which was possible given that the Italian people were now
                            “guided by a firm hand and by a man [De Stefani] who knows how to act,”
                            a man who was implementing the formula “more money and less spend-
                            ing” (“Bold Italian Finance,” The Times, May 14, 1923, 11).
                       15   As we know from chapter 7, in his post at the Economist, Einaudi had only
                            praise for the Fascist economic policies of the 1920s.
                       16   “Italy—Signor De Stefani’s Speech—An Italian Geddes Committee—The
                            Deficit for 1923–24—New Debts after 1914—Treasury Control—Economic
                            Improvement,” Economist, May 26, 1923, 1194ff. Not only was the govern-
                            ment diligently applying a Geddes Axe; the application was also bearing
                            its fruits, since “the economic conditions” were “improving,” as De Stefani
                            noted in his speech. In particular, imports had decreased, and exports had
                            gone up.
                       17   “Fascismo,” The Times, July 2, 1923, 13.
                       18   Ibid. In another article, titled “Signor De Stefani and London Italians” (The
                            Times, July 28, 1924, 15), De Stefani’s speech in London to the Italian Coop-
                            erative Club at Greek Street was reported. He addressed a large audience
                            which included Italians from all districts of London: “the Italians, he said,
                            were steadily at work and through patient sacrifice had rebuilt and restored
                            the economic and financial structure of the country.”
                       19   “Fascismo,” The Times, July 2, 1923, 13.
                       20   “Signor Mussolini’s Policy,” The Times, November 17, 1922; also, in FO 371/
                            7660, fol. 236.
                       21   Mr. Harvey, second secretary of the Embassy, reiterated the words of his
                            colleague when, a year later, he reported about the further postponement
                            of the Italian elections. Harvey put it bluntly: “the members of the present
                            chamber are little better than caretakers. . . . The abject attitude of the
                            Chamber, moreover, is justified to some extent by the obvious fact that it is
                            no longer representative of the country” (FO 371/8886, fol. 46).
                       22   Graham reported that the “bill of full powers” was the “only means of af-
                            fecting economies.” He explained that, “having been granted ‘full powers’
                            by Parliament in November 1922 for the period of one year, Signor Musso-
                            lini was independent of the Chamber and he governed as a dictator” (An-
                            nual Report for 1923, FO 371/9946, fol. 246, p. 16). There were long reports



                     390




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   390        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 257–258


                            on the functioning of the bill of full powers (see chapter 7) remarking that
                            “according to various Ministerial declarations, there would appear to be
                            practically no limits to the scope of the powers conferred by the new law”
                            (November 21, 1922, FO 371/7660).
                       23   In November 1922 the Economist had noted that “Apparently the object
                            of Signor Mussolini is to form a Government of the best men of his own
                            choice, not at the dictation of the groups from which they come, and one
                            of the first planks in his programme is drastic cutting down of public
                            expenditure. . . . The attempt to perform it will be watched with sympathy
                            by observers of whatever nationality, who realise the crying need for sane
                            finance in Europe” (“The Fascisti in Power,” Economist, November 4, 1922,
                            840ff.).
                       24   For example, the Economist was jubilant: “Signor Mussolini has restored
                            order, and eliminated the chief factors of disturbance.” In particular, “wages
                            reached their upper limits, strikes multiplied.” These were the factors of
                            disturbance, and “no government was strong enough to attempt a remedy”
                            (“The Results of Fascism,” Economist, March 22, 1924, 623ff.). And in 1924
                            The Times praised Fascism as a solution to the ambitions of the “Bolshevist
                            peasantry” in “Novara, Montara, and Alessandria” and “the brutal stupidity
                            of these folk.” The article continued, “For two years and a half, agricultural
                            strikes, so virulent that the crops were left to perish in the ground, were the
                            order of the day. The petty leaders of the Communists, more stupid even
                            than their followers, desired to make here the first experiments in so-called
                            collective management” (“The Dissident Fascisti,” The Times, June 17,
                            1924, 15).
                       25   In August 1928 Graham wrote to Chamberlain and spoke of a tradeoff be-
                            tween liberty and order in which the second prevailed: “There is the ques-
                            tion of liberty, which exercises so many minds. There is no doubt that the
                            restraints are actually or potentially harsh, and are often unfair. But there
                            are very many Italians who ask themselves if they were better off, spiritu-
                            ally, in the days when Giolitti held sway, or when Nitti failed to govern,
                            when strike succeeded strike and violence followed violence, when Italy’s
                            claims were impatiently regarded by other Powers, and her international
                            position politely, or impolitely, questioned” (FO 371/13679, fol. 97, 7).
                       26   The chairman of the bank, Beaumont Pease, reported that “Nothing but a
                            return to lofty ideals, to the highest conception of State authority, to stern
                            civic discipline and self-sacrifice, to strenuous work and thrift, could save
                            the nation from complete moral and economic disruption” (“The British
                            Italian Banking Corporation, Limited,” Economist, March 22, 1924, 640ff.).
                            And again: “the achievements of this remarkable ruler’s administration in
                            less than 15 months of plenary powers are astonishing, more especially in
                            matters that count from the economic and financial point of view” (ibid.).
                            In 1927 the line was much the same; the chairman of the British National



                                                                                                       391




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   391        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 258–259


                            Provincial Bank, Sir Henry Goschen, reported that “In Italy, owing to the
                            firm administration of Signor Mussolini, the economic position is being
                            strengthened” (“National Provincial Bank, Limited—Rubber Securities,
                            Ltd.,” Economist, January 29, 1927, 225ff.).
                       27   The reform of the new Italian penal code contributed to the authoritar-
                            ian consolidation. It reversed “the previous direction of Italian criminal
                            legislation. It is based on a retributed as against a preventive or curative
                            view of punishment . . . capital punishment is reintroduced. Punishments
                            are increased and new crimes are created . . . usury is to be a crime and
                            so are economic or political strikes, boycotts or lock-outs” (“The New
                            Italian Penal Code,” 1927, OV 9/440, fol. 34, in the Bank of England
                            Archives).
                       28   On the Fascist militia’s integration with the state apparatus, see for example
                            “Celebration of Rome’s Foundation Day: Fascista Military Organization,”
                            April 25, 1923, FO 371/8885, fols. 1–4.
                       29   In November 1922 Graham told his compatriots that “for him [Mussolini]
                            it is the black shirts not the Chamber that represent Italy, and his rule is
                            to be based on the former, the latter only continuing to sit on suffrance”
                            (November 16, 1922, FO 371/7660, fol. 235).
                       30   For example, a dispatch of December 28, 1923 (FO 371/8886, fol. 174) re-
                            ported about the Fascisti’s attack on the journalist and politician Giovanni
                            Amendola in the streets of Rome. On June 13, 1924, the embassy reported
                            about the attack on Signor Misuri after he had condemned Fascista ex-
                            tremist measures in the Chamber (FO 371/9938, fol. 176). On the Fascist
                            persecutions of Nitti see Ambassador Graham’s “General Report,” 1923
                            (FO 371/9946, fol. 246, 24).
                       31   A fascinating document of the foreign office called “The Reasons for the
                            Success of the Fascisti in the Municipal Elections of Milan” reveals that
                            the British government was well aware of the anti-democratic tendencies
                            of the Fascist party from the very beginning. It explains that the sudden
                            defeat of the Socialist and Communist parties in the Milan election of
                            December 10, 1922, by the “constitutional bloc” (Fascisti with all the other
                            parties of order—i.e., the nationalists, liberals, and other constitutional
                            parties) was achieved via violence and electoral fraud: “by 5 a.m. on the
                            Sunday morning the various polling booths were occupied by parties of
                            the Fascisti, armed with sticks and revolvers. Any efforts on the part of the
                            socialists to encourage socialist votes, such as propaganda in the form of
                            leaflets, distribution of socialist ballot papers, etc., were at once suppressed
                            by the Fascisti, and the culprits generally had to be taken to the infirmary.
                            The socialist voters found themselves in a somewhat difficult situation”
                            (FO 371/7673, fol. 248).
                       32   A dispatch for example read: “Italian authorities have recently conducted
                            a round-up of communists on a large scale, the number of arrests for the



                     392




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   392        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 259–261


                            whole country being given as over a thousand” (September 25, 1925, FO
                            371/10784, fol. 162). In 1928 the British embassy reported on the trial by
                            the Italian special tribunal of “persons accused of communistic activities”
                            (February 8, 1928, FO 371/12949, fol. 235).
                       33   On the Matteotti Affair, see chapter 7, note 18. For further dispatches on the
                            Matteotti affair, see FO 371/7660, fols. 176, 178, and 187.
                       34   Graham to Ramsay MacDonald, June 23, 1924, FO 371/9938, fol. 214; for a
                            similar line, see “The Crisis in Italy,” Economist, July 5, 1924, 11.
                       35   “Achievements of Fascismo,” The Times, October 31, 1923, 13.
                       36   Migone points out that even someone like Walter Lippmann, the director
                            of the New York World—the only daily paper with national-level politi-
                            cal influence to maintain a consistently critical stance toward the Fascist
                            regime—had specified to Thomas William Lamont of Morgan Bank
                            that he did not “fail to recognize the progress that has been made on the
                            financial front” (Migone 2015, 60). As Migone writes: “One might expect
                            that the destruction of that constitutional order which was supposed to
                            be the hallmark of the liberal democratic order would elicit some reac-
                            tion in the nation founded on one of the world’s great liberal revolutions.
                            Instead critiques and negative evaluations were utterly marginalized, nearly
                            completely confined to Marxist and extreme factions, often within minor-
                            ity ethnic communities. . . . This editorial and diplomatic interpretation
                            on the rise of Fascism constitutes significant early evidence of what would
                            become an American historical tendency: ever more frequent toleration of
                            exceptions to democratic rule, in the name of ever more imposing Ameri-
                            can interests” (ibid., 47–48). The attitude of the American diplomatic and
                            financial circles matched the attitudes I have explored for Britain. For the
                            American reception of the Matteotti affair, see Migone (2015, 50–68).
                       37   “The British-Italian Banking Corporation, Limited,” Economist, March 21,
                            1925, 559ff.
                       38   Winston Churchill’s remarks are an exemplary illustration of this way
                            of thinking: “Different nations have different ways of doing the same
                            thing. . . . Had I been an Italian, I am sure that I should have been with you
                            from start to finish in your victorious struggle against . . . Leninism. But
                            in Britain we have not yet had to face this danger in the same poisonous
                            form . . . but I do not have the least doubt that, in our struggle, we shall be
                            able to strangle communism” (“Churchill Parla dell’Italia e del Fascismo,”
                            Il corriere della sera, January 21, 1927; De Felice 1966, 330).
                       39   from our rome correspondent, “The Italian Elections,” The Times,
                            April 4, 1924, 11.
                       40   Personal cable to Benjamin Strong, October 26, 1927, reprinted in https://
                            fraser.stlouisfed.org/archival-collection/papers-benjamin-strong-jr-1160/
                            correspondence-great-britain-473618/fulltext. Plenty of documents in the
                            hands of the Bank of England spoke of the suppression of freedom of the



                                                                                                       393




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   393        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 261–263


                            press. See for example, the letter by Monsieur Louis Franck to Governor
                            Norman: “There is no free press, or public opinion, or liberal criticism and
                            comment, nor even personal liberty, which the methods of the administra-
                            tion tend more and more to curtail” (November 9, 1926, OV 36/1, fol. 19).
                       41   The words of the governor of the Federal Reserve of the US, Benjamin
                            Strong, were paramount to those of his colleague. He wrote to Norman to
                            express his pleasure about the collaboration between the central banks of
                            the three countries, remarking that “Whatever may be our views in regard
                            to democracy and individual freedom (which frequently means liberty and
                            sometimes license) I think we can both agree that the present regime in Italy
                            has been little short of miraculous in promoting the welfare of the Italian
                            people. We may not entirely agree, speaking from the standards of liberal de-
                            mocracy, with the methods, but we certainly cannot disagree as to the results
                            accomplished” (Letter of November 9, 1927, G1/307, fol. 47A). Once more the
                            alleged benefit for the Italian people was associated with the resumption of
                            capital accumulation and the people’s subjugation under its economic laws.
                       42   For example, in 1924 Graham sent a telegram congratulating the “sweep-
                            ing Fascista victory” (“Italian Election Results,” April 11, 1924, FO 371/9938,
                            fol. 50). The electoral violence was largely downplayed (“there were
                            relatively few serious cases of violence and bloodshed,” April 18, 1924, ibid.,
                            fol. 61) and once more understood as a typical trait in Italian affairs: “That
                            the sweeping Fascista victory was due in some degree to improper measures
                            of coercion is no doubt the case, but it must be born in mind that violence
                            and corruption have always been widely prevalent in Italian elections, par-
                            ticularly in the south” (April 11, 1924, FO 371/9938, fol. 51). Ultimately what
                            mattered was that Mussolini represented political stability. He commented
                            that, if the English electoral system (i.e., a majoritarian voting system) were
                            adopted, “practically the whole chamber would be Fascista” (ibid.).
                       43   In this article Einaudi expressed concern for the institutionalization of the
                            new corporativist state and the lack of political liberty. In the same breath,
                            however, he reminded the reader that “there exists among us, also, a full
                            recognition of the work Signor Mussolini has done for his country and
                            admiration for his high ideals” (“The Corporative State in Italy,” Economist,
                            June 23, 1928, 1273ff.).
                       44   That year Graham also wrote that “the question as to what would happen if
                            Signor Mussolini was suddenly to disappear is one that nobody can answer.”
                            In August 1929, when the first plebiscite went overwhelmingly in favor of
                            Mussolini, Graham would gladly report to Minister Austen Chamberlain that
                            “the outward ‘Fascistisation’ of the country has proceeded with undiminished
                            speed and with every appearance of success” (Ambassador Graham’s confi-
                            dential letter to A. Henderson, August 1, 1929, FO 371/13679, fol. 96, 2).
                       45   The Times commented that “an offensive against the lira has been started in
                            foreign markets by creditor countries with a view to exerting pressure on



                     394




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   394        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 263–264


                            Italy to induce her to pay her debts” (“Fall of the Lira,” The Times, June 19,
                            1925, 15; also in OV 36/22, fol. 31).
                       46   Italy’s financial weakness, negative balance of trade, and reliance on British
                            finance for imports of munitions and food, made it a war debtor, owing, at
                            the time of the armistice, most of its money to Great Britain ($1.855 billion,
                            adjusted for gold shipments and credits to Great Britain amounting to
                            $152,314,000) and to the United States ($1.31 billion). Foreign capital was
                            at the country’s throat. To finance the war effort Britain was also forced to
                            borrow from the US (£1.027 billion by the end of the armistice—Morgan
                            1952, 320). High indebtedness to the new American hegemony had a strong
                            impact on British and Italian postwar politics. The United States adopted
                            an intransigent stance toward war loans that forced all countries to be
                            rigorous in their expectations for payment in order to in turn meet their
                            own liabilities. This was especially the case for Britain, which required Italy,
                            among many other countries, to pay back its debts.
                       47   British financier Sir Felix Schuster to the governor of the Bank of Italy,
                            Bonaldo Stringher, April 23, 1923, G 30/11.
                       48   The British embassy translated and commented on the Italian budgetary
                            estimate for each year. (See for example the year 1927–28 in FO 371/12198,
                            fol. 84.) Similarly, the Bank of England kept many files to monitor financial
                            maneuvers, trade balance, and monetary circulation in Italy throughout
                            the 1920s (see for example OV 36/1, fols. 13–14). For similar financial moni-
                            toring on the part of the US, see Migone (2015).
                       49   The June 1925 report of the Bank of England largely made the same points
                            (see OV 36/1, fol. 3).
                       50   On November 14, 1925, Count Volpi and Mr. A. W. Mellon, United States
                            secretary of treasury and president of the American Foreign Debt Com-
                            mission, signed in Washington “an agreement consolidating Italy’s debt to
                            the United States, which, on June 15th, 1925, including capital and interest,
                            less certain sums in respect of payments already effected, had amounted to
                            2,042 million dollars” (OV 36/22, 2); on January 7, 1926, an agreement was
                            concluded in London between Count Volpi and Mr. Churchill that settled
                            Italy’s debt to the United Kingdom (OV 36/22, 14).
                       51   The stabilization of the lira could only occur with the help of international
                            credit—partially private, partially furnished by the issuing institutions
                            under the jurisdiction of the head of the Federal Reserve, Benjamin Strong,
                            and the bankers of the house of Morgan with the concurrence of the Bank
                            of England. Since May 1926 these foreign financiers had pushed Italy to re-
                            turn to the gold standard. The American banker Thomas William Lamont,
                            representing J. P. Morgan, had been in the business of “urging Italy at any
                            rate as being in the strongest position to consider seriously an early return
                            to the gold basis . . . it met with immediate approval of Montagu Norman
                            and Governor Strong” (May 21, 1926; OV 36/1, fol. 14).



                                                                                                        395




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   395        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 264–266


                       52   Two other important loans in support of stabilization occurred in 1927
                            concomitantly with the return to the gold standard: the governor of the
                            Bank of Italy, Bonaldo Stringher, obtained a loan of $75 million from pri-
                            vate British and American banks (Hambro Bank and Rothschild Bank) and
                            $75 million from the reserve banks.
                       53   By 1924 the embassy had compiled many reports on De Stefani’s doings,
                            discussing the consolidation of the floating debt (letter from Graham to
                            Prime Minister James Ramsay MacDonald, July 3, 1924, FO 371/9936, fol.
                            42; see also OV 36/1, fol. 21); the payment of internal debt; the decline in
                            the country’s trade deficit; and increases in savings and in employment
                            (Summary of Financial Statement, June 27, 1924, FO 371/9936, fol. 44). The
                            frequency of these reports monitoring Italy only increased during the time
                            of the stabilization of the lira. See for example the report of September 3,
                            1926 (OV 36/22, fol. 83 and OV 36/1, fol. 16).
                       54   Letter from Volpi to Mussolini, October 20, 1926, in Cotula and Spaventa
                            (1993, 575) [I tecnici inglesi che sono i nostri critici più avveduti].
                       55   For example, a comparison of the economic fundamentals of Britain and of
                            Italy written in 1927 reported a great decline in Italian floating debt and an
                            improvement of the balance of trade. It also remarked that Italy’s burden of
                            domestic debt was much less pronounced than that of Britain given its large
                            increase in industrial production (OV 9/440, 6–7; see also OV 9/440, fol. 21).
                       56   As documented in chapter 7, curtailment of wages by law became a regular
                            practice of Fascist industrial austerity. Starting in 1925, the British embassy
                            widely reported on the subordination of labor to the Fascist state (October
                            9, 1925, FO 371/9936, fol. 257) through the outlawing of strikes, lockouts,
                            and unions—except for the Fascist Syndicate—which were reduced to a
                            “state of complete impotence, so far as negotiations with the employers are
                            concerned” (December 1, 1925, FO 371/9936, fol. 259). Fascist syndicalism,
                            Graham specified, “was a factor for collaboration in production” (Decem-
                            ber 21, 1925, FO 371/9936, fol. 276).
                       57   The most important leaders of the dissolved CGdL were reported to have
                            signed a declaration supporting corporativism (see FO 371/12202, fol. 77).
                       58   “The Stabilisation of the Lira,” Economist, December 31, 1927, 1179ff.
                       59   A memorandum from the Bank of England reads: “the Bank of Italy is a
                            joint stock company, and was formed by the fusion of the National Bank
                            of Italy with the National Bank of Tuscany and the Tuscan Bank of Credit
                            under the law of August 1893” (OV 36/22, fol. 76). See also “Italian Bank-
                            Note Reform,” The Times, May 25, 1926, 13.
                       60   The doings of the Bank of England were constantly in the minds of Italian
                            technocrats. Finance Minister Volpi, for example, announced: “the Bank
                            of Italy, following the example set by the Bank of England when the British
                            government had decided to revert to the gold parity in 1924, had exerted
                            itself to obtain the co-operation of international banking circles, partly to



                     396




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   396        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 267–275


                            strengthen the defence of the exchange as definitely fixed, and partly be-
                            cause it thought that credits form the central banks and big bankers would
                            testify to cordial co-operation with and universal approval of the govern-
                            ment’s decisions” (OV 36/22, fol. 123A, 13–14).
                       61   G14/95, fol. 1, extracts from the minutes of the committee of the Treasury.
                       62   Norman’s concerns were grounded in the conviction that “a measure of
                            independence in fact is essential for the conduct of any Central Bank on
                            financial (rather than political) lines” (Letter to Strong, October 29, 1926,
                            fol. 9, 2). He also wrote to the Dutch central banker Gerard Vissering to
                            say: “the existing regime is fatal to independence, and I cannot co-operate
                            with a partner whose hands are tied” (December 28, 1926, G1/307, fol. 37,
                            2). On Norman’s insistence on the “complete autonomy and freedom from
                            political control” regarding Italy, see Letter to Dr. H, Schacht, November 5,
                            1926, G1/307; and Letter to Sir Arthur Salter, November 8, 1926, G1/307).
                       63   Norman also reminded the Bank of Italy that “in the case of Austria,
                            Hungary, Germany and Belgium, legal independence has been obtained
                            for the Central Bank,” and that the other central bankers wished nothing
                            more than “to cooperate with an independent Stringher” (October 25, 1926,
                            G14/95, 2–3).
                       64   In another letter to Dr. Schacht, Governor Strong wrote: “I have not ex-
                            amined the position in detail, but according to Stringher the budget is bal-
                            anced; there is no floating debt; the necessary economic adjustments have
                            taken place; the balance of trade is satisfactorily adjusted; and the Bank of
                            Italy not only accepts the general principles of co-operation among central
                            banks on a financial basis but is established in a position of independence
                            and financial control” (December 5, 1927, OV 9/440).
                       65   FO 371/12947, fol. 176A, 49.
                       66   “Italian Internal Situation and Policy,” FO 371/8885, fol. 88, June 9, 1923.
                       67   “Achievements of Fascismo,” The Times, October 31, 1923, 13.
                       68   The IMF’s imposition of austerity has not stopped even under the COVID-
                            19-pandemic crisis and even once the IMF’s own research shows that aus-
                            terity worsens poverty and inequality. See “IMF Paves Way for New Era of
                            Austerity Post-COVID-19,” Oxfam, October 12, 2020, https://www.oxfam
                            .org/en/press-releases/imf-paves-way-new-era-austerity-post-covid-19.



                     Chapter Nine

                        1   The wage shares in both Britain and Italy saw a brief upturn during the
                            early 1930s, at the peak of the recession. This was not a political outcome
                            but a mechanical one due to the anti-cyclical nature of labor shares, as
                            profits are lower in times of crisis. However, after 1933 in both countries the
                            recovery disproportionately accrued to profits, and wage shares declined.



                                                                                                       397




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   397        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 276–277


                            In Britain, the series reached a new minimum in 1938 (73 percent), while in
                            Italy the wage share saw its lowest level in 1942–1944 (41 percent).
                        2   This working measure of exploitation does not consider “unproductive
                            labor,” i.e., all the work of domestic servants and the like which in those
                            years was a significant part of the labor force in both countries. In principle
                            the wages of unproductive labor ought to be added into the measure of
                            surplus value; thus our working measure understates the rate of exploita-
                            tion. In Britain, the rate of exploitation increased from 0.29 in 1921 to 0.36
                            in 1929. In Italy, in 1918 the rate of exploitation was 0.82 and in 1928 it was
                            1.25. (Note that these numbers are not immediately depicted in figure 9.2
                            given that the chart shows a two-year moving average.)
                        3   Thomas and Dimsdale (2017, table A56). Note that here 2013 is used as the
                            base year (or 2013 = 100).
                        4   Total Labor Productivity Net of Housing and PA, Giordano and Zollino
                            (2020).
                        5   The renewed favorable environment for investment is visible in the remark-
                            able growth of share prices. In Britain these prices increased by 63 percent
                            from 1923 to 1928. In Italy the index of stock and dividend yield too made
                            an astounding recovery after a bad setback during the red biennium.
                            Indeed, as we know from chapter 7, privatization, tax breaks, and bank res-
                            cues provided “excellent profit opportunities for financial intermediaries”
                            (Toniolo 1995, 300–302). It guaranteed a total yield of stocks and dividends
                            that almost tripled over the course of the decade. From 1923 to the end
                            of the decade, the new publicly traded companies increased their value
                            by almost 40 percent. This rise indicates how austerity created favorable
                            conditions for the Italian financial world (see Siciliano 2001, figure 1.1).
                        6   Even if the class implications of austerity are embodied in the profit rate
                            itself, regardless of the secondary question of how much of the profit rate
                            the capitalists wind up investing, it is interesting to note that in our case
                            high profit rates favored greater capital accumulation, evidenced by the im-
                            pressive growth of industrial production starting in 1921. In both countries,
                            industrial production almost doubled over the decade (Mitchell 1998, 422).
                            Capital stock also grew substantially. In Italy it rose by 18 percent between
                            1922 and 1929. This is an impressive spike given that the British capital
                            stock increased only 4.8 percent during the same time. For the Italian data
                            on nominal capital stock see Bank of Italy’s LABCAP 3.0 (2010). For British
                            data see Thomas and Dimsdale (2017).
                        7   “The average 1922–1929 real growth rate in Italy was 4 (compared to 1.7
                            in 1861–1896 and 2.2 in 1896–1913)” (Gabbuti 2020b, 256).
                        8   As we know from chapter 6, in Britain monetary austerity hit starting
                            in the spring of 1920, producing a slump that was followed by a decade
                            of “doldrums.” In Pigou’s words: “The Doldrums was a period of relative
                            stability and quasi-equilibrium. But the equilibrium was not a healthy one,



                     398




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   398        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                               notes to pages 278–281


                            because it was characterised throughout by a very large amount of involun-
                            tary idleness” (Pigou 1947, 42). In general, historians agree that “the British
                            economy remained for the whole 1920s in a condition of underutilization
                            of resources and elevated unemployment” (Toniolo 1980, 22–23).
                        9   Official unemployment statistics by definition downplay the actual level of
                            unemployment. For instance, they do not count those who have given up
                            looking for work, those who never succeeded in finding jobs in the first
                            place, and those who do not enter the work force because of the hopeless-
                            ness of it. Therefore, many scholars estimate “real unemployment” to be
                            significantly higher than the official figure, even double. For the contem-
                            porary case of the United States, see the Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Labor
                            Force Statistics from the Current Population Survey,” https://www.bls.gov/
                            cps/cps_htgm.htm. For a detailed study of British unemployment statistics
                            and their shortcomings, see W. R. Garside (1990).
                       10   The national average downplays the extent of the crisis in the staple
                            industries (steel, coal, textile, etc.) located largely in the north of England,
                            which suffered the most from the revaluation of the pound. For example,
                            the mining industry, which employed 1.3 million workers in 1920, lost over
                            200,000 workers by the end of the decade. With the Great Depression the
                            picture only got worse. Unemployment reached a peak of 3.4 million in
                            1932, and then averaged slightly less than 2.5 million until the start of World
                            War II. It was indeed the war that provided the stimulus and ultimate solu-
                            tion to this endemic social problem.
                       11   The interpretation of strike data cannot be universalized. In different mo-
                            ments of the history of capitalism low strike rates may indicate different
                            power dynamics. A low strike rate may reflect dominance on either side. In
                            the 1920s as well as in the 1980s, the decrease in the number of strikes can
                            certainly be attributed to the attacks on organized labor that are typical of
                            industrial austerity.
                       12   Our findings correspond to the majority of empirical studies on strikes,
                            which show how strike frequency is associated with the business cycle:
                            when unemployment decreases, or inflation increases, the number of
                            strikes tends to increase. Similarly, unions’ greater organizational strength
                            is correlated with a greater number of strikes. See Franzosi (1989, 358).
                       13   Of which 1,046,000 were in agriculture. See Ministero dell’ Economia
                            Nazionale (1924, 278).
                       14   Including industry, construction, agriculture, mining, etcetera. See Toniolo
                            (2013, table A5 for number of workers in total industry and in the total
                            economy).
                       15   The industrial reserve army also increased because of the tightening of
                            immigration laws in the United States and the pressure to work experi-
                            enced by the downtrodden rural population with exceedingly low living
                            standards.



                                                                                                        399




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   399        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 281–285


                       16   The consequences of the Great Depression on the Italian labor market were
                            dramatic, even worse than for Britain: between 1929 and 1932 the number
                            of people registered at the employment offices quadrupled (Mattesini
                            and Quintieri 2006, 417). The government’s efforts to remain on the gold
                            standard drastically diminished the measures and resources mobilized
                            to cure unemployment, which soared during the years of the Great
                            Depression, peaking at more than 1 million in 1933, or 36.6 percent of the
                            industrial workforce. (Note that this is an estimate arrived at by averaging
                            the maximum and minimum employment figures for 1933.) See the Italian
                            bollettino del lavoro of 1925–35, later called “Sindacato e corporazione.” For
                            the data on the industrial workforce see Toniolo (2013, table A5).
                       17   Note that the discussion of wages applies only to those that are still em-
                            ployed. Real wages partly reflect a compensatory upward effect, given that
                            lower-paid workers are the first to be thrown into unemployment.
                       18   Federico et al. (2019) provide empirical evidence of the exceptionally low
                            real wages of Italian unskilled workers in the period 1861–1913 with respect
                            to workers in other European countries, such as Britain, Germany, and the
                            Netherlands. This is especially the case for workers in the south of Italy.
                       19   In those two years metal workers lost almost 30 percent of their nominal
                            daily wages. This downward trend in Italy continued up until the Ethiopian
                            war of 1935, when daily nominal wages reached their ultimate low for the
                            average industrial worker (45 percent lower than the 1926 level, dropping to
                            14.9 lire from 26.34 lire). With respect to the “red years” this represented a
                            fall of more than one third in daily compensation. (All figures from Schol-
                            liers and Zamagni 1995, 231–32, table A6.)
                       20   For data on Italian nominal daily industrial wages, see Scholliers and
                            Zamagni (1995, table A6). Note that Mitchell’s (1998) historical statistics
                            show a sevenfold increase for all industrial workers.
                       21   Cohen (1979) shows similar data for Italy: a decline in foodstuff consump-
                            tion throughout the 1920s, especially of protein-rich food and fresh fruits,
                            on the part of the lower classes. The author concludes that “fascist policy
                            objectives were achieved in part through reduced food consumption by
                            Italian workers” (1979, 83). Tellingly, the only class of consumption expen-
                            ditures that did increase was rent, which rose from 1926 onward, result-
                            ing in an increase in its proportion of total household expenditures (see
                            Vecchi 2017).
                       22   Favero (2010, 337) uncovers a telling anecdote: in publishing the pro-
                            ceedings of its first scientific meeting in October 1939 in Pisa, the Italian
                            Statistical Society excluded only one intervention, namely a paper that set
                            out to prove empirically that the relationship between earnings and needs
                            of working-class families was below subsistence level.
                       23   During the Fascist years “many distressed households approached asylums
                            as poor houses, to temporarily relieve them from expenses for dependent



                     400




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   400        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 285–287


                            members” (Gabbuti 2020b, 272). The “increase in confinements in Italy
                            (from 60,000 to 100,000 between 1925 and 1941—Moraglio 2006) would
                            therefore be another, rather disturbing sign of the worsening condition
                            of the poor” (Gabbuti 2020b, 271–72). Indeed, the situation for the poor
                            did not improve in the 1930s. Contrary to what the Fascist propaganda
                            declared, “assistance funding was even cut by 4.5 million between 1929-
                            1930 and 1930-1931” (Melis 2018, 468), resulting in a contraction of
                            poverty relief (Preti and Venturoli 2000, 744). On the ineptness of social
                            redistributive measures during the inter-war period, see also Giorgi and
                            Pavan (2021).
                       24   Gabbuti (2020b, 263–72) documents how the deterioration in living
                            conditions of the Italian population continued into the 1930s, visible in the
                            increase of malnutrition, the spread of deaths due to malaria and other
                            diseases, and higher mortality rates.
                       25   For an analysis of income concentration in Britain in the 1920s, see León
                            and de Jong (2018).
                       26   These numbers that assess income by means of fiscal source fail to account
                            for the large profits that were exempt from taxation (illicit profits, the
                            incomes of the high state bureaucracy, etc.) and especially for the large-
                            scale tax evasion that took place overwhelmingly at the top. As we know
                            from chapter 7, such evasion was largely facilitated by the Fascist regime’s
                            tax reforms (see Gabbuti 2020a, 21–24). Gabbuti points out that the war on
                            tax evasion had the effect of increasing the fiscal burden on small taxpay-
                            ers. Also, Gabbuti and Gómez-León (2021) reveal a steep rise in inequality
                            throughout the 1920s.
                       27   This term emerged out of a conversation with Duncan Foley, and I thank
                            him for it.
                       28   For a recent Kaleckian-inspired model that formally illustrates the
                            consequences of welfare measures and of full employment for economic
                            growth—especially the negative impact of a rising rate of employment on
                            the rate of capital accumulation and the consequent mechanisms of politi-
                            cal reaction, see Flaschel et al. (2008).
                       29   Austerity’s negative effect on aggregate demand has been highlighted by
                            Keynesians as the madness of current austerity, but also by many Marx-
                            ists, particularly those of the Monopoly Capital or Monthly Review school
                            (see, for example, Foster and McChesney 2012). Indeed, the 1929 crisis,
                            interpreted by some as a crisis of overproduction, was certainly exacer-
                            bated by the precariousness of an economic growth that depended so heav-
                            ily on exports in an over-flooded international market, given the forced
                            “abstinence” of British and Italian workers, among others. Moreover, the
                            perseverance of austerity policies throughout the 1930s contributed heavily
                            to worsening the Great Depression (for British policies in Britain during
                            the Great Depression, see Howson 1975, chapter 4).



                                                                                                      401




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   401        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 288–290



                     Chapter Ten

                        1   For example, Semmler (2013) argues how an “austerity-driven reduction in
                            spending has a stronger negative effect on output and employment when
                            there is severe financial stress, which in turn reduces consumption and
                            investment, feeding a downward spiral” (2013, 899). These models suggest
                            that the impacts of fiscal consolidation are worse (to the point of causing
                            a recession) in a state of financial fragility, low growth, low propensity
                            to consume, and high indebtedness such as was the case in Europe after
                            2008. For an assessment of austerity in Europe after the 2008 crisis, see also
                            Mittnik and Semmler (2012) and Semmler and Haider (2016).
                        2   For a discussion on the trend of Argentina’s interest rates and the country’s
                            macroeconomic crisis of 2001–2002, see Damill and Frenkel (2003).
                        3   For a comprehensive account of austerity in various countries around the
                            globe starting from the 1970s, see Shefner and Blad (2019).
                        4   In both Britain and Italy, the 1970s were years of social protection that
                            extended well beyond the factory floor. The British national health system
                            reorganized in 1974, in favor of greater centralization and accessibility. In
                            those same years the Italian welfare state undertook a substantial qualita-
                            tive and quantitative expansion with, among other things, a centralized
                            healthcare system and a generalized unemployment scheme. The state
                            regulation of the labor market rested on three main pillars: a) a general
                            unemployment insurance scheme, b) centralized employment services, and
                            c) a scheme for short-term earnings replacement in case of temporary re-
                            dundancies [Cassa integrazione guadagni ordinaria]. In the mid-1950s, total
                            Italian social expenditures (including income maintenance, healthcare, and
                            social assistance) absorbed around 10 percent of GDP; in 1970 this percent-
                            age had risen to 17.4 percent, and it reached 22.6 percent in 1975—a level in
                            line with that of France or Belgium and higher than that of Britain (Ferrera
                            and Gualmini 2004, 35). On the evolution of the Italian social welfare sys-
                            tem, see Giorgi and Pavan (2021); on the British system see Peden (1985).
                        5   Greater unionization mirrored greater contestation, which had already
                            exploded in Italy during the hot autumn of 1969 when a season of strikes,
                            factory occupations, student protests, and mass demonstrations spread
                            throughout northern Italy, with its epicenter at Fiat in Turin. Most stop-
                            pages were unofficial, led by workers’ factory committees or militant
                            leftist groups rather than by the (party-linked) trade unions. The demands
                            echoed those of the “red biennium” of 1919–1920: for example, active
                            participation in industrial management, “egalitarianism” (i.e., reduction
                            of wage differentials among genders, categories, and qualifications), and
                            greater control on income policies (see Ferrera and Gualmini 2004, 43).
                            An important victory came with the signing of the Statute of the Workers




                     402




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   402        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                     notes to page 291


                            in May 1970, which represented a legal and political turning point for labor
                            rights. For example, the statute reinforced the power of trade unions in the
                            workplace, giving them a central role on factory planning bodies. It also in-
                            stituted the rule of compulsory re-hiring in the case of no “justified reason”
                            in all enterprises with more than fifteen employees, abolishing the option
                            of paying the penalty instead. In 1975, Confindustria even had to accept an
                            agreement that established a new system to index wages to inflation, which
                            would push up wages. These material gains did not prevent further protests
                            from emerging that year: in 1977 an extremely radical student movement
                            united with the growing sector of precarious workers and the most radical
                            sections of the unionized working classes (for example, the metal work-
                            ers of the Federazione Lavoratori Metalmeccanici, FLM) in polemic with
                            the moderatism of CGIL and in favor of a non-capitalist society. For a
                            comprehensive recent reconstruction of the 1977 movement, see Falciola
                            (2015).
                        6   Thomas and Dimsdale (2017).
                        7   Ibid.
                        8   On the Mont Pelerin Society, see Mirowski and Plehwe (2015). Note that
                            the Mont Pelerin economist Friedrich Hayek had a frequent correspon-
                            dence with Prime Minister Thatcher, who was vastly influenced by him.
                        9   The “Statement of Aims” of the newly formed Mont Pelerin Society begins
                            with a warning: “The central values of civilization are in danger. Over large
                            stretches of the Earth’s surface the essential conditions of human dignity
                            and freedom have already disappeared. In others they are under constant
                            menace from the development of current tendencies of policy. The position
                            of the individual and the voluntary group are progressively undermined by
                            extensions of arbitrary power. Even that most precious possession of West-
                            ern Man, freedom of thought and expression, is threatened by the spread of
                            creeds which, claiming the privilege of tolerance when in the position of a
                            minority, seek only to establish a position of power in which they can sup-
                            press and obliterate all views but their own.” See “Statement of Aims,” the
                            Mont Pelerin Society, https://www.montpelerin.org/statement-of-aims/.
                       10   The chancellor spoke the following words: “I propose to raise the excise
                            duties as a whole broadly in line with inflation, but to make some mod-
                            est adjustments within the total. The duty on cigarettes and hand-rolling
                            tobacco will be increased, by the equivalent, including VAT, of between
                            threepence and fourpence for a packet of 20 cigarettes. This will take effect
                            from midnight on Thursday. The duty on a packet of five small cigars will
                            rise by twopence, but that on pipe tobacco will remain unchanged. As to
                            the alcohol duties, I propose increases which, including VAT, will put about
                            a penny on the price of a pint of average-strength beer and cider, fourpence
                            on a bottle of table wine, and sixpence on a bottle of sparkling or fortified
                            wine. There will once again be no increase in the duty on spirits. These



                                                                                                      403




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   403        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 291–295


                            changes will take effect from 6 o’clock tonight” (“Taxes on Spending,” HC
                            Deb 15 March 1988, vol. 129, cc 1003).
                       11   For a short history of privatizations in Britain that continue unabated after
                            the Thatcher epoch, see Seymour (2012).
                       12   On anti-union legislation between 1980 and 2000 see the report by the
                            British Trades Union Congress (TUC), http://www.unionhistory.info/
                            timeline/1960_2000_Narr_Display.php?Where=NarTitle+contains+
                            27Anti-Union+Legislation3A+1980-200027.
                       13   Author’s calculations. The rate of exploitation has been calculated as the
                            ratio of the profit share and the wage share. The data is taken from Thomas
                            and Dimsdale (2017).
                       14   Council of European Communities (1992, 25).
                       15   See EU membership criteria: https://ec.europa.eu/neighbourhood
                            -enlargement/policy/conditions-membership_en.
                       16   About the European integration process, especially after Maastricht,
                            Dyson and Featherstone (1996) comment: “The domestic policy agenda
                            has shifted more decisively to budget retrenchment, reform of the welfare
                            state and privatization; wage and price flexibility have taken on a new
                            importance in a policy framework that rules out devaluation; and consti-
                            tutional questions have been raised about the performance of the political
                            system and the type of political structure that can best support domestic
                            discipline. There is also a shift in the balance of power between domestic
                            actors, upgrading the role of technocrats and the Banca d’Italia (with,
                            post-Maastricht, two senior Banca d’Italia officials holding office as prime
                            minister)” (1996, 273).
                       17   For data on public expenditures see Ragioneria Generale dello Stato (RGS
                            2011). On the wage share dynamics in Italy see Gabbuti (2020a).
                       18   Mario Monti, interview on the RAI television show Che tempo che fa, No-
                            vember 25, 2012, available on YouTube at https://www.youtube.com/watch
                            ?v=2L88XcsQvN0.
                       19   Ibid. Monti stated: “[Regarding the cuts to health care provided for ALS
                            patients] We get to things that are heavy, sometimes very negative, but the
                            answer is simple, it goes so far because it has been considered a petty crime
                            for decades to evade taxation it was considered that individual interest and
                            cunningness had the right of citizenship in all fields, because everyone has
                            protected their privileges.”
                       20   Jepsen (2019). See also data reported in Magnani (2019).
                       21   For data on real per capita consumption in Italy see Jordà, Schularick, and
                            Taylor (2017).
                       22   Apart from positions as professors at prestigious universities in the US
                            and Europe (Harvard, Chicago, Stanford, MIT, Bocconi, etc.) and edito-
                            rial roles with the top economic journals (such as the Quarterly Journal of
                            Economics, the European Economic Review, etc.), these experts held seats in



                     404




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   404        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 296–300


                            prominent institutions for the dissemination of policy-relevant economic
                            research. Alesina, for example, directed the Political Economic Program
                            of the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) from its formation
                            in 2006. The professors also worked as consultants for the World Bank,
                            European Central Bank, and International Monetary Fund, and advised
                            government agencies such as the French Treasury, the New York Fed-
                            eral Reserve, the Italian Treasury, and the Italian central bank. They also
                            directly advised Italian governments. Tabellini advised the government
                            of Romano Prodi (2006–2008) and Matteo Renzi (2014–2016); Giavazzi
                            advised Mario Monti (2011–2013) and as of 2021 is currently an advisor for
                            Mario Draghi. The experts also regularly write in the main Italian press.
                            For details on these experts’ national and international networks of power,
                            see Helgadóttir (2016).
                       23   As Alesina astutely summarized: “What keeps an economy from slumping
                            when government spending, a major component of aggregate demand,
                            goes down? . . . The answer: private investment. Our research found that
                            private-sector capital accumulation rose after the spending-cut deficit re-
                            ductions, with firms investing more in productive activities—for example,
                            buying machinery and opening new plants. . . . After the tax-hike deficit
                            reductions, capital accumulation dropped” (Alesina 2012). Furthermore,
                            Alesina and Perotti (1995) claim that “the main theoretical reasons which
                            suggest that fiscal adjustments may not be contradictory is the ‘crowding
                            in’ argument: a reduction in the government borrowing requirement, by
                            reducing interest rates, may ‘crowd in’ private investments” (1995, 21). For a
                            reframing of these arguments, see also Alesina et al. (2019).
                       24   Alesina, Tabellini, and Perotti have repeated this argument, in favor of
                            austerity based on entrepreneurs’ expectations, over reams and reams in
                            the past decades (see for example: Alesina and Ardagna 2010, 2013; Alesina,
                            Ardagna, and Galí 1998; Alesina and Perotti 1995, 1997; Alesina and de
                            Rugy 2013; and Alesina, Favero, and Giavazzi 2015).
                       25   Indeed, the austere experts displayed a constant anxiety for the potential
                            disruption of the orderly basis of capital accumulation. To them, “debt-
                            financed increases of public employment, wages of public sector employ-
                            ees, unemployment benefits and labor taxes put pressure on unions’ wage
                            claims, leading to higher private sector wages, lower employment, capital
                            and output” (Alesina and Ardagna 2013).
                       26   On supply-side reforms, see Alesina (2012) and Alesina and Rugy (2013).
                       27   To the point that there exists a large discrepancy between the national
                            electoral results and the representation on the ECB board. In particular, the
                            European Left is vastly underrepresented on the ECB board (see Alesina
                            and Grilli 1991, 29).
                       28   A central bank is understood to be politically independent if it has the
                            capacity to choose the final goal of monetary policy. Economic indepen-



                                                                                                      405




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   405        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     notes to pages 300–302


                            dence, on the other hand, is the freedom to choose the instruments with
                            which to pursue these goals. See Grilli et al. (1991, 366–67) and Alesina and
                            Grilli (1991). For a detailed analysis of the ECB’s institutional characteristics
                            and how they guarantee the highest degree of independence, see Alesina
                            and Grilli (1991). As the former governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus,
                            Athanasios Orphanides, notes: “it [the ECB] is considerably more indepen-
                            dent and arguably less accountable than the Fed. In the United States, the
                            Federal Reserve reports to Congress and its powers are subject to change
                            by law. By contrast the European Parliament has relatively little power over
                            the ECB. The legal framework of the ECB is governed by the Treaties of the
                            European Union and as such cannot be modified by any single government
                            or by the European Parliament” (Statement by Athanasios Orphanides be-
                            fore the Subcommittee on Monetary Policy and Trade of the Committee on
                            Financial Services, United States House of Representatives, November 13,
                            2013, 62–67).
                       29   “Art 21.1 forbids the ECB to open [new] lines of credit to community or
                            national public institutions, not even on a temporary basis. The same
                            article bans the ECB from participating on the primary market for national
                            government bonds” (Alesina and Grilli 1991, 14–15).
                       30   Functional Distribution of Income (Percent), Table 2, base 1977 in Agacino
                            and Madrigal (2003, 47). Here the rate of exploitation is calculated as net
                            profits/wages. The authors show that the trend continues, even if at lower
                            rates, after the fall of Pinochet. The change in regime does not mean a
                            change in the underlying austerity agenda. For a brief discussion on how
                            successive governments in Chile preserved Pinochet’s economic and insti-
                            tutional model, and on the current struggles to gain back citizens’ role, see
                            Vergara (2021).
                       31   On the estimation of poverty in Latin America, see Económicas, NU
                            CEPAL División de Estadística y Proyecciones (1990).
                       32   “The World’s Worst Central Banker,” Economist, October 16, 1993, 108.
                       33   “On Monday, he [Yelstin] shut down several newspapers partial to parlia-
                            ment and banned some political organizations that have opposed him.
                            And he continued a pattern of harassing prominent political opponents—
                            cutting their phone lines, taking away their cars, removing their security
                            details” (Elliott and McKay 1993).
                       34   “Yeltsin regrets,” Economist, October 9, 1993, 15ff.
                       35   In Russia unemployment was 5 percent in 1991 and 13 percent in 1998 (see
                            https://www.macrotrends.net/countries/RUS/russia/unemployment-rate).
                            Real wages declined 40 to 60 percent between 1987 and 1996, catalyzing a
                            major reduction of wage shares, which dropped from 41 percent of GDP in
                            1987–88 to 26 percent in 1993–94 (see Milanovic 1998, 29).
                       36   Milanovic (1998, 68, table 5.1, for household budget surveys [HBS]). Klein
                            (2008, 237–38) gives a good picture of the decline in the living conditions



                     406




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   406        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                              notes to pages 302–304


                            of Russians in those years, which were reflected in higher addiction, sui-
                            cide, and homicide rates.
                       37   Non-wage private sector income equals income from sales of agricultural
                            products, entrepreneurial income, interest and dividends, income from
                            abroad, gifts, and income (or consumption).
                       38   Lawrence H. Summers, “Comment,” in Blanchard et al. (1994, 253).
                       39   See for example “Borrowed Time,” Economist, May 22, 1993, 66.
                       40   See breakdown of the $2.3 trillion in: “A Breakdown of the CARES Act,”
                            J. P. Morgan, April 14, 2020, https://www.jpmorgan.com/insights/research/
                            cares-act.
                       41   The ILO’s World Employment and Social Outlook Trends 2021, p. 12
                            (https://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/
                            ---publ/documents/publication/wcms_795453.pdf). The report further
                            reads: “Projected employment in 2021, however, will still fall short of its
                            pre-crisis level. In addition, it is likely that there will be fewer jobs than
                            would have been created in the absence of the pandemic. Taking this
                            forgone employment growth into account, the crisis-induced global short-
                            fall in jobs is projected to stand at 75 million in 2021 and at 23 million in
                            2022. . . . The corresponding shortfall in working hours in 2021 amounts to
                            3.5 per cent—equivalent to 100 million full-time jobs.”
                       42   The 2021 ILO report tells us that “global labour income, which does not in-
                            clude government transfers and benefits, was US$3.7 trillion (8.3 per cent)
                            lower in 2020 than it would have been in the absence of the pandemic.
                            For the first two quarters of 2021, this shortfall amounts to a reduction in
                            global labour income of 5.3 per cent, or US$1.3 trillion” (“World Employ-
                            ment and Social Outlook Trends,” 12). Moreover, the World Bank estimates
                            that in 2020 an additional 78 million people were living in extreme poverty,
                            defined as households with a per capita income of less than US$1.90 per
                            day in PPP terms (Lakner et al. 2021).
                       43   The combined wealth of these billionaires rose from $8.04 trillion to
                            $12.39 trillion between March 18, 2020, and March 18, 2021. In that year
                            there were 179 more billionaires (see Collins and Ocampo 2021). For a
                            more general perspective on this trend, see Zucman (2019).
                       44   “A Conversation with Lawrence H. Summers and Paul Krugman,” Prince-
                            ton Bendheim Center for Finance, video recording, February 12, 2021,
                            minute 45, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EbZ3_LZxs54&t=121s.




                                                                                                      407




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   407        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   408        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Bibliography




                     Archival Sources

                     Archivio Centrale dello Stato [Central Archives of the State] (ACS), Piazza degli
                        Archivi, Rome, Italy. Citations of items in this collection will be made by item
                        title or description, date, ACS, collection name, box or folder number, and
                        item number. Catalogue and some digitized items available online at https://
                        www.acs.beniculturali.it.
                     Bank of England Archives (BoEA), Threadneedle Street, London, UK. Citations
                        of items in this archive will be made by item title or description, date, depart-
                        ment code (OV9 = Overseas Department, Papers of Otto Ernst Niemeyer;
                        OV36 = Overseas Department, Italy; G1 = Governor’s files, G14 = Committee
                        of Treasury files), collection number, piece and/or item number, and page,
                        folder, or folio numbers. Catalogue and digitized items available online at
                        https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive.
                     Churchill Archive Center, Papers of Sir Ralph Hawtrey (RGH), Churchill College,
                        Cambridge, UK. Citations of items in this collection will be made by item title
                        or description, date, GBR/0014/HTRY, followed by box/folder number and
                        item number. Catalogue and some digitized items available online at https://
                        www.chu.cam.ac.uk/archives/collections/.
                     Gazzetta Ufficiale del Regno d’Italia, 1917–1926 (GU). Rome: Stabilimento Poli-
                        grafico dello Stato. Cited as Law, Regent’s Decree [Decreto luogotenenziale],
                        Regent’s Decree Law [Decreto-legge luogotenenziale], Royal Decree [Regio
                        decreto], or Royal Decree Law [Regio decreto legge], in GU, followed by volume
                        number, date, and page number. Available and searchable online at https://
                        www.gazzettaufficiale.it/homePostLogin.
                     National Archives of the UK (TNA), Kew, Richmond, UK. Citations of items in
                        this archive will be made by item title or description, date, department code
                        (IR = Inland Revenue, FO = Foreign Office, T = Treasury), collection number,




                                                                                                     409




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   409        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                        piece and/or item number, and page, folder, or folio numbers. Some records
                        and catalogues available online at https://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk.
                     Proceedings of Parliament, UK. Hansard report of all parliamentary debates.
                        Cited in text by speaker’s name, HC (House of Commons) or HL (House of
                        Lords), volume number, column number(s), date. Available and searchable
                        online at https://hansard.parliament.uk.


                     Published Sources

                     Addison, Christopher. The Betrayal of the Slums. London: H. Jenkins, 1922.
                     Agacino, Rafael, and María Madrigal. “Chile Thirty Years after the Coup: Chiaro-
                        scuro, Illusions, and Cracks in a Mature Counterrevolution.” Latin American
                        Perspectives 30, no. 5 (2003): 41–69. https://www.jstor.org/stable/3184958.
                     Alber, Jens. “L’espanzione del welfare state in Europa Occidentale: 1900–1975.”
                        Rivista italiana di scienza politica 13, no. 2 (1983): 203.
                     Alberti, Manfredi. Senza lavoro: La disoccupazione in Italia dall’unità a oggi. First
                        edition. Bari: GLF Editori Laterza, 2016.
                     Alesina, Alberto. “Macroeconomic Policy in a Two-Party System as a Repeated
                        Game.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, no. 3 (1987): 651–78. https://doi
                        .org/10.2307/1884222.
                     ———. “Macroeconomics and Politics.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1988,
                        vol. 3, ed. Stanley Fischer, 13–62. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Eco-
                        nomic Research, Inc., 1988.
                     ———. “Fiscal Adjustments: Lessons from Recent History.” Prepared for the Eco-
                        fin Meeting in Madrid, April 15, 2010.
                     ———. “The Kindest Cuts.” City Journal (Autumn 2012). https://www.city-journal
                        .org/html/kindest-cuts-13503.html.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Silvia Ardagna. “Large Changes in Fiscal Policy: Taxes
                        versus Spending.” Tax Policy and the Economy 24, no. 1 (2010): 35–68. https://
                        doi.org/10.1086/649828.
                     ———. “The Design of Fiscal Adjustments.” Tax Policy and the Economy 27, no. 1
                        (2013): 19–68. https://doi.org/10.1086/671243.
                     Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, and Jordi Galí. “Tales of Fiscal Adjustment.” Eco-
                        nomic Policy 13, no. 27 (1998): 489–545. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1344762.
                     Alesina, Alberto, Silvia Ardagna, Roberto Perotti, et al. “Fiscal Policy, Profits, and
                        Investment.” American Economic Review 92, no. 3 (2002): 571–89. https://www
                        .jstor.org/stable/3083355.
                     Alesina, Alberto, Omar Barbiero, Carlo Favero, et al. “Austerity in 2009–13.” Eco-
                        nomic Policy 30, no. 83 (July 2015): 383–437. https://doi.org/10.1093/epolic/eiv006.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Geoffrey Carliner. Politics and Economics in the Eighties.
                        Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
                     Alesina, Alberto, Gerald D. Cohen, and Nouriel Roubini. “Macroeconomic Policy




                     410




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   410        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                        and Elections in OECD Democracies*.” Economics & Politics 4, no. 1 (1992):
                        1–30. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0343.1b00.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Veronique de Rugy. Austerity: The Relative Effects of Tax
                        Increases versus Spending Cuts. Arlington, VA: Mercatus Center at George Ma-
                        son University, 2013. https://www.hks.harvard.edu/centers/mrcbg/programs/
                        growthpolicy/austeritythe-relative-effects-tax-increases-versus-spending.
                     Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. “The Output Effect of
                        Fiscal Consolidation Plans.” Journal of International Economics 96, 37th An-
                        nual NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics (July 1, 2015): S19–42.
                        https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jinteco.2014.11.003.
                     Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, et al. Austerity. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
                        sity Press, 2019.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Vittorio Grilli. The European Central Bank: Reshaping
                        Monetary Politics in Europe. Working Paper 3860. Cambridge, MA: National
                        Bureau of Economic Research, 1991. https://doi.org/10.3386/w3860.
                     Alesina, Alberto, James Mirrlees, and Manfred J. M. Neumann. “Politics and Busi-
                        ness Cycles in Industrial Democracies.” Economic Policy 4, no. 8 (1989): 57–98.
                        https://doi.org/10.2307/1344464.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti. The Political Economy of Budget Deficits.
                        Working Paper 4637. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
                        1994. https://doi.org/10.3386/w4637.
                     ———. “Reducing Budget Deficits.” Paper prepared for the conference “Grow-
                        ing Government Debt—International Experiences,” Stockholm, June 12, 1995.
                        https://doi.org/10.7916/D87P95XP.
                     ———. “The Welfare State and Competitiveness.” The American Economic Review
                        87, no. 5 (1997): 921–39. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2951333.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Howard Rosenthal. “Partisan Cycles in Congressional
                        Elections and the Macroeconomy.” American Political Science Review 83, no. 2
                        (1989): 373–98. https://doi.org/10.2307/1962396.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Nouriel Roubini. “Political Cycles in OECD Economies.”
                        Review of Economic Studies 59, no. 4 (1992): 663–88. https://doi.org/10.2307/
                        2297992.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Jeffrey Sachs. “Political Parties and the Business Cycle in
                        the United States, 1948–1984.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 20, no. 1
                        (1988): 63–82. https://doi.org/10.2307/1992667.
                     Alesina, A., and L. H. Summers. “Central Bank Independence and Macroeco-
                        nomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence.” Journal of Money, Credit
                        and Banking 25, no. 2 (1993), 151–62.
                     Alesina, Alberto, and Guido Tabellini. “External Debt, Capital Flight and Political
                        Risk.” Journal of International Economics 27, nos. 3–4 (November 1989): 199–
                        220. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-1996(89)90052-4.
                     ———. “A Positive Theory of Fiscal Deficits and Government Debt.” The Review of
                        Economic Studies 57, no. 3 (1990): 403–14. https://doi.org/10.2307/2298021.



                                                                                                      411




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   411        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                     ———. “Positive and Normative Theories of Public Debt and Inflation in Histori-
                        cal Perspective.” European Economic Review 36, nos. 2–3 (April 1992): 337–44.
                        https://doi.org/10.1016/0014-2921(92)90089-F.
                     Arendt, Hannah. “What Is Authority?” In Between Past and Future: Eight Exer-
                        cises in Political Thought. New York: Viking Press, 1961.
                     Arias, Gino. “Il consiglio delle corporazioni e l’economia corporativa.” Gerarchia 7,
                        no. 5 (1929): 367–73.
                     ———. “Problemi economici mondiali.” Gerarchia 10, no. 8 (1931): 643–50.
                     ———. “La crisi bancaria americana.” Gerarchia 12, no. 3 (1933): 215–19.
                     Armitage, Susan H. The Politics of Decontrol of Industry: Britain and the United
                        States. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1969.
                     Arnot, Robert. Further Facts from the Coal Commission: Being a History of the
                        Second Stage of the Coal Industry Commission; with Excerpts from the Evidence.
                        London: George Allen and Unwin, 1919.
                     Augello, Massimo M., et al., eds. L’economia divulgata: Stili e percorsi Italiani,
                        1840–1922. Milan: FrancoAngeli, 2007.
                     Augello, Massimo, and Luca Michelini. “Maffeo Pantaleoni (1857–1924). Biografia
                        scientifica, storiografia e bibliografia.” Il pensiero economico Italiano 5, no. 1
                        (1997): 119–50.
                     Baccini, Alberto, Fausto Domenicantonio, Giuseppe Felicetti, Andrea Ripa di
                        Meana, Giancarlo Salvemini, and Vera Zamagni. Banca d’Italia II: Ricerche
                        per la storia della Banca d’Italia. Rome: Banca d’Italia, 1993. https://www
                        .bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/collana-storica/contributi/contributi-02/index
                        .html.
                     Bachi, Riccardo. Italia economica nell’anno 1915: Annuario della vita commer-
                        ciale, industriale, agraria, bancaria, finanziaria e della politica economica.
                        Città di Castello: S. Lapi, 1916. https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=njp
                        .32101064528845&view=1up&seq=12&q1=imprenditore.
                     ———. L’Italia economica nel 1916. Città di Castello: S. Lapi, 1917.
                     ———. Italia economica nell’anno 1920: Annuario della vita commerciale, in-
                        dustriale, agraria, bancaria, finanziaria e della politica economica. Città di
                        Castello: S. Lapi, 1921. https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=njp.3210106452
                        8886&view=1up&seq=7&q1=Confederazione20Generale20dellE280
                        99Agricoltura.
                     ———. L’alimentazione e la politica annonaria in Italia, con una appendice su “Il
                        rifornimento dei viveri dell’esercito italiano” di Gaetano Zingali. New Haven,
                        CT: Yale University Press, 1926.
                     Balandi, Gian Guido, and Gaetano Vardaro, eds. Diritto del lavoro e corporativismi
                        in Europa, ieri e oggi. Facoltà di Economia e Commercio di Urbino 6. Milan:
                        F. Angeli, 1988.
                     Banca d’Italia. L’archivio di Alberto de’ Stefani. Rome: Banca d’Italia, 1983. https://
                        www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/altre-pubblicazioni-asbi/1983-de-stefani/
                        index.html.



                     412




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   412        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                               bibliography


                     Barbagallo, Francesco. Francesco S. Nitti. Turin: Unione tipografico-editrice
                        torinese, 1984.
                     Bartocci, Enzo. Le politiche sociali nell’Italia liberale: 1861–1919. Rome: Donzelli, 1999.
                     Barucci, P. “La diffusione del marginalismo, 1870–1890.” In Il pensiero economico
                        italiano, 1850–1950, ed. M. Finoia. Bologna: Cappelli, 1980.
                     Bel, Germà. “The First Privatisation: Selling SOEs and Privatising Public Mo-
                        nopolies in Fascist Italy (1922–1925).” Cambridge Journal of Economics 35, no. 5
                        (2011): 937–56. https://www.jstor.org/stable/24232431.
                     Bellanca, N. “’Dai principii’ agli ‘erotemi.’ Un’interpretazione unitaria.” Rivista di
                        politica economica 85 (1995).
                     Bezza, Bruno. “La mobilitazione industriale: Nuova classe operaia e contrattazi-
                        one collettiva.” In Storia della società Italiana, vol. 21, La disgregazione dello
                        stato liberale, 71–102. Milan: Nicola Teti Editore, 1982.
                     Bini, Piero. “Quando l’economia parlava alla società. La vita, il pensiero e le
                        opere.” Rivista di politica economica 85 (1995).
                     ———. “‘Esiste l’Homo economicus? La didattica di Maffeo Pantaleoni: Dai prin-
                        cipii di pura alle lezioni di economia politica. In economia divulgata stili e
                        percorsi (1840–1922).” Manuali e trattati 1 (2007).
                     ———. Captains of Industry and Masters of Thought: The Entrepreneur and the
                        Tradition of Italian Liberal Economists from Francesco Ferrara to Sergio Ricossa.
                        SSRN Scholarly Paper, ID 2718541, Social Science Research Network, April
                        2013. https://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2718541.
                     Bini, Piero, and Antonio Maria Fusco. Umberto Ricci (1879–1946): Economista
                        militante e uomo combattivo. Florence: Polistampa, 2004.
                     Black, R. D. C. “Ralph George Hawtrey 1879–1975.” In Proceedings of the British
                        Academy. London: British Academy, 1977.
                     Blackett, Basil. War Savings in Great Britain, or, The Gospel of Goods and Services,
                        Addresses. New York: Liberty Loan Committee, 1918a.
                     ———. “Thinking in Terms of Money the Cause of Many Financial Fallacies.” The
                        Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 75 (1918b): 207–16.
                     ———. “What I Would Do with the World.” The Listener 6, no. 150 (1931).
                     ———. “The Practical Limits of Taxable Capacity.” Public Administration 10, no. 3
                        (1932): 232–41. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1b01.
                     Blanchard, Olivier, et al., eds. The Transition in Eastern Europe, vol. 1: Country
                        Studies. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.
                     Blecker, Robert A., and Mark Setterfield. Heterodox Macroeconomics. Chelten-
                        ham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2019.
                     Blyth, Mark. Austerity: The History of a Dangerous Idea. New York: Oxford Uni-
                        versity Press, 2013.
                     Bordogna, Lorenzo. “Le relazioni industriali in Italia dall’accordo Lama-Agnelli
                        alla riforma della scala mobile.” In L’Italia repubblicana nella crisi degli anni
                        settanta. Partiti ed organizzazioni di massa, ed. Francesco Margeri and Paggi
                        Leonardo, vol. 3, 189–221. Soveria Mannelli: Rubbettino, 2003.



                                                                                                            413




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   413        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                 6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                     Bortolotti, Lando. “Origine e primordi della rete autostradale in Italia, 1922–1933.”
                        Storia urbana 16, no. 59 (1992).
                     Boyce, Robert W. D. British Capitalism at the Crossroads, 1919–1932: A Study in
                        Politics, Economics, and International Relations. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
                        versity Press, 1987.
                     Boyle, Andrew. Montagu Norman: A Biography. New York: Weybright and Talley,
                        1968.
                     Brosio, Giorgio, and Carla Marchese. Il potere di spendere: Economia e storia della
                        spesa pubblica dall’unificazione ad oggi. Bologna: Il Mulino, 1986.
                     Buffetti, Ferdinando. Manuale della cooperativa di lavoro e di produzione. Rome:
                        Buffetti, 1921. https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/010694376/Home.
                     Buozzi, Bruno. “L’Occupazione delle fabbriche.” Almanacco socialista Italiano.
                        Rome: Partito Socialista Italiano, 1935.
                     ———. “Le condizioni della classe lavoratrice in Italia (1922–1943).” Annali, Fon-
                        dazione Giangiacomo Feltrinelli 14 (1972): 382.
                     Burgess, Keith. The Challenge of Labour: Shaping British Society, 1850–1930. Lon-
                        don: Croom Helm, 1980.
                     Burk, Kathleen, ed. War and the State: The Transformation of British Government,
                        1914–1919. Boston: Allen & Unwin, 1982.
                     Busino, G. “La riscoperta di Umberto Ricci economista.” Rivista storica Italiana
                        112, no. 3 (2000): 1166–74.
                     Camarda, Alessandro, and Santo Peli. L’altro esercito: La classe operaia durante la
                        prima guerra mondiale. First edition. Milan: Feltrinelli Economica, 1980.
                     Camera dei deputati, Segretariato generale. La legislazione fascista 1922–1928. 7
                        vols. Rome: Typography of the Chamber of Deputies [Tipografia della Camera
                        dei deputati], 1929.
                     Canzoneri, Matthew B., et al., eds. Establishing a Central Bank: Issues in Europe
                        and Lessons from the US. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992.
                     Caracciolo, Alberto. “La grande industria nella Prima Guerra Mondiale.” In La
                        formazione dell’Italia industriale, 163–219. Bari: Laterza, 1963.
                     ———. Il trauma dell’intervento: 1914/1919. Florence: Vallecchi, 1968.
                     ———. La formazione dell’Italia industriale. Bari: Laterza, 1969.
                     Cassel, Gustav. “The Economic and Financial Decisions of the Genoa Confer-
                        ence.” Manchester Guardian Commercial, June 15, 1922, 140.
                     Castronovo, Valerio. L’industria Italiana dall’ottocento a oggi. 2nd edition. Milan:
                        A. Mondadori, 1982.
                     ———. Storia economica d’Italia: Dall’ottocento ai giorni nostri. Turin: Einaudi,
                        1995.
                     Cecini, S. “Il finanziamento dei lavori pubblici in Italia: Un confronto tra età
                        liberale ed epoca fascista.” Rivista di storia economica 27, no. 3 (2011): 325–64.
                     Cherubini, Arnaldo. Storia della previdenza sociale in Italia 1860–1960. First edi-
                        tion. Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1977.
                     Chiozza Money, L. G. The Triumph of Nationalization. London and New York:



                     414




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   414        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                        Cassell and Co., 1920. https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=aeu.ark:/13960/
                        t00z8dx5z&view=1up&seq=1.
                     Ciocca, Pierluigi. Umberto Ricci: L’uomo l’economista. Lanciano: Carabba, 1999.
                     ———. “Einaudi e le turbolenze economiche fra le due guerre.” Rivista di storia
                        economica 3 (2004): 279–308. https://doi.org/10.1410/18779.
                     ———. Ricchi per sempre? Una storia economica d’Italia, 1796—2005. First edition.
                        Turin: Bollati Boringhieri, 2007.
                     Clarke, John Joseph. The Housing Problem: Its History, Growth, Legislation and
                        Procedure. New York: Sir I. Pitman & Sons, 1920. https://babel.hathitrust.org/
                        cgi/pt?id=uc2.ark:/13960/t53f4wz5t&view=1up&seq=7.
                     Clarke, Simon. Keynesianism, Monetarism, and the Crisis of the State. Aldershot,
                        UK: Gower Publishing, 1988.
                     Clyne, P. K. “Reopening the Case of the Lloyd George Coalition and the Post-War
                        Economic Transition.” Journal of British Studies 10, no. 1 (1970): 162–75.
                     Coates, Ken, and Anthony Topham, eds. Industrial Democracy in Great Britain: A
                        Book of Readings and Witnesses for Workers’ Control. London: Macgibbon &
                        Kee, 1968.
                     Cohen, Jon S. “The 1927 Revaluation of the Lira: A Study in Political Economy.” Eco-
                        nomic History Review 25, no. 4 (1972): 642–54. https://doi.org/10.2307/2593953.
                     ———. “Fascism and Agriculture in Italy: Policies and Consequences.” Economic
                        History Review 32, no. 1 (1979): 70. https://doi.org/10.2307/2595966.
                     Cole, G. D. H. Labour in War Time. London: George Bell & Sons, 1915.
                     ———. Chaos and Order in Industry: G. D. H. Cole. London: Methuen, 1920a.
                     ———. The World of Labour: A Discussion of the Present and Future of Trade
                        Unionism. 4th edition. London: George Bell & Sons, 1920b.
                     ———. “The British Building Guild: An Important Development of Policy.” Jour-
                        nal of the American Institute of Architects 9, no. 1 (1921a): 289–91.
                     ———. “The Great Building Adventure: The English Building Guilds at Work.”
                        Journal of the American Institute of Architects 9, no. 1 (1921b): 17–19.
                     ———. Trade Unionism and Munitions. New York: H. Milford, 1923.
                     ———. A History of the Labour Party from 1914. First edition. London: Routledge,
                        1948. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429446009.
                     ———. A History of Socialist Thought, Vol. 4. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1958.
                     Collins, Chuck, and Omar Ocampo. “Global Billionaire Wealth Surges $4 Trillion
                        over Pandemic.” Institute for Policy Studies, March 31, 2021. https://ips-dc.org/
                        global-billionaire-wealth-surges-4-trillion-over-pandemic/.
                     Comitato Centrale di Mobilitazione. “Le ricerche statistiche per la mobilitazione
                        industriale e gli ammaestramenti per il dopo-guerra.” Il bollettino del comitato
                        centrale di mobilitazione 4 (October 1917): 130–32.
                     ———. “Il problema sociale dell’infortunio sul lavoro.” Il bollettino del comitato
                        centrale di mobilitazione 8-9 (February-March 1918): 96–103. https://catalog
                        .hathitrust.org/Record/012511927.
                     Committee on Financial Services. House Hearing, 113th Congress—What Is Central



                                                                                                      415




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   415        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                        about Central Banking? A Study of International Models. Washington, DC:
                        US Government Printing Office, 2013. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
                        CHRG-113hhrg86685/pdf/CHRG-113hhrg86685.pdf.
                     Costamagna, Carlo. “La validità della carta del lavoro.” Lo stato 2, no. 11 (1931).
                     ———. “Direttive di azione economica.” Lo stato 4, no. 1 (1933): 1–5.
                     Cotula, F., and L. Spaventa. “La politica monetaria tra le due guerre: 1919–1935.”
                        In La Banca d’Italia: Sintesi della ricercar storica 1893–1960, ed. F. Cotula,
                        M. De Cecco, and G. Toniolo. Rome and Bari: Laterza, 1993. https://www
                        .semanticscholar.org/paper/La-Politica-monetaria-tra-le-due-guerre-3A-1919
                        -1935-Cotula-Spaventa/9cf7f455ec7c916874bb19d9e7c9d0ca3b7d7dc2.
                     Council of European Communities, Commission of the European Communities.
                        “Treaty on European Union.” Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of
                        the European Communities, 1992.
                     Cox, Garfield V. “The English Building Guilds: An Experiment in Industrial Self-
                        Government.” Journal of Political Economy 29, no. 10 (December 1921): 777–90.
                     Coy, Peter. “Why are Fast Food Workers Signing Noncompete Agreements?”
                        New York Times, September 29, 2021. https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/29/
                        opinion/noncompete-agreement-workers.html.
                     Critchley, T. A. A History of Police in England and Wales. Revised edition. London:
                        Constable, 1978.
                     Crocella, Carlo, et al., eds. L’inchiesta parlamentare sulle spese di guerra (1920–
                        1923). Rome: Camera dei deputati, Archivio storico, 2002.
                     Cronin, James E. Industrial Conflict in Modern Britain. Lanham, MD: Rowman
                        and Littlefield, 1979.
                     ———. Labour and Society in Britain, 1918–1979. London: Batsford Academic and
                        Educational, 1984.
                     Damill, Mario, and Roberto Frenkel. “Argentina: Macroeconomic Performance
                        and Crisis.” Paper prepared for the Macroeconomic Policy Task Force of the
                        International Policy Dialogue (IPD), 2003. https://doi.org/10.7916/D8862P4D.
                     Danninger, Stephan, Alberto Alesina, and Massimo Rostagno. “Redistribu-
                        tion through Public Employment: The Case of Italy.” International Monetary
                        Fund Working Papers 1999, no. 177 (1999): 44pp. https://doi.org/10.5089/
                        9781451858853.001/.
                     Daunton, M. J. Just Taxes: The Politics of Taxation in Britain, 1914–1979. New York:
                        Cambridge University Press, 2002.
                     Davis, E. G. “R. G. Hawtrey, 1879–1975.” In Pioneers of Modern Economics in Brit-
                        ain, 203–33. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1981.
                     Davis, Joseph S. “World Currency and Banking: The First Brussels Financial Con-
                        ference.” Review of Economics and Statistics 2, no. 12 (1920): 349–60.
                     Dawson, William Harbutt, ed. After-War Problems. London: George Allen &
                        Unwin, 1917. https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=inu.30000127800187.
                     De Cecco, M. “Il ruolo delle istituzioni nel pensiero di Pantaleoni.” Rivista di
                        politica economica 3 (1995).



                     416




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   416        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     De Felice, Renzo. Mussolini il fascista: La conquista del potere (1921–1925). Turin:
                        Einaudi, 1966.
                     De Luca, Giuseppe. “La costruzione della rete autostradale Italiana: L’autostrada
                        Firenze-Mare, 1927–1940.” Storia urbana 16, no. 59 (1992).
                     De Stefani, Alberto. Lezioni di economia politica: Appunti: Anno accademico 1919–
                        20. Padua: La Litotipo, 1919.
                     ———. “Vilfredo Pareto.” Gerarchia (1923): 1187–89.
                     ———. L’azione dello Stato Italiano per le opere pubbliche (1862–1924). Rome:
                        Libreria dello Stato, 1925.
                     ———. La legislazione economia della guerra. Bari: Laterza; New Haven, CT: Yale
                        University Press, 1926a.
                     ———. La restaurazione finanziaria 1922–1925. Modena: N. Zanichelli, 1926b.
                     ———. Vie maestre: Commenti sulla finanza del 1926. Trieste: Fratelli Treves,
                        1927.
                     ———. Colpi di vaglio: Commenti sulla finanza del 1927. Milan: Fratelli Treves,
                        1928.
                     ———. L’oro e l’aratro. Milan: Treves, 1929.
                     ———. Quota 90: La rivalutazione della lira: 1926–1928. Edited by Marco di Mico;
                        translated by L. Spaventa. Turin: UTET Università, 1998.
                     De Stefani, Alberto, and Francesco Perfetti. Gran consiglio, ultima seduta: 24-25
                        luglio 1943. Florence: Le Lettere, 2013.
                     Del Vecchio, Gustavo. “Prefazione.” In M. Pavesi, Economia corporativa e dottrine
                        realiste, 5–18. Bologna: Stabilimento Poligrafico Riuniti, 1929.
                     ———. “Einaudi Economista.” Giornale degli economisti e annali di economia 23,
                        no. 3/4 (1964): 136–44. https://www.jstor.org/stable/23238553.
                     ———. “Einaudi economista.” In Einaudi, ed. M. Achille Romani. Milan: Bocconi
                        Press, 2011.
                     Deutscher, Patrick. R. G. Hawtrey and the Development of Macroeconomics. Lon-
                        don: Macmillan, 1990.
                     ———. “Ralph George Hawtrey (1879–1975).” In The Palgrave Companion to Cam-
                        bridge Economics, ed. Robert A. Cord, 477–93. London: Palgrave Macmillan
                        UK, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1057/978-1-137-41233-1_21.
                     Dingley, Tom. The Shop Stewards and Workers’ Committee Movement. Coventry:
                        Shop Stewards & Workers’ Committee, 1918.
                     Dobb, Maurice Herbert. Theories of Value and Distribution since Adam Smith;
                        Ideology and Economic Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973.
                     Dominedò, V. “Umberto Ricci economista.” Economia internazionale 14, no. 1
                        (1961): 1–20.
                     Dyson, Kenneth, and Kevin Featherstone. “Italy and EMU as a ‘Vincolo Esterno’:
                        Empowering the Technocrats, Transforming the State.” South European Society
                        and Politics 1, no. 2 (June 1996): 272–99. https://doi.org/10.1080/1360874960
                        8539475.
                     Económicas, UN CEPAL División de Estadística y Proyecciones. Magnitud de



                                                                                                      417




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   417        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                         la pobreza en América Latina en los años ochenta. Santiago de Chile: CEPAL,
                         1990. https://repositorio.cepal.org/handle/11362/33451.
                     Eichengreen, Barry J. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
                         1919–1939. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
                     Einaudi, Luigi. Prediche. Bari: G. Laterza, 1920.
                     ———. La guerra e il sistema tributario italiano. Bari: G. Laterza; New Haven, CT:
                         Yale University Press, 1927.
                     ———. “Le premesse del salario dettate dal giudice.” La riforma sociale 42 (1931):
                         311–16.
                     ———. La condotta economica e gli effetti sociali della guerra italiana. New Haven,
                         CT: Yale University Press, 1933.
                     ———. Cronache economiche e politiche di un trentennio (1893–1925). Turin:
                         Einaudi, 1959–65.
                     ———. From Our Italian Correspondent: Luigi Einaudi’s Articles in The Economist,
                         1908–1946. Edited by Roberto Marchionatti. Florence: L. S. Olschki, 2000.
                     Elliott, Dorinda, and Betsy McKay. “Yeltsin’s Free-Market Offensive.” Newsweek,
                         October 17, 1993. https://www.newsweek.com/yeltsins-free-market-offensive
                         -194394.
                     Ermacora, Matteo. Cantieri di guerra: Il lavoro dei civili nelle retrovie del fronte
                         Italiano 1915–1918. Bologna: Il Mulino, 2005.
                     ———. “Labour, Labour Movements, Trade Unions and Strikes (Italy).” Translated
                         by Benjamin Ginsborg. In 1914–1918 Online: International Encyclopedia of the
                         First World War, ed. Ute Daniel, Peter Catrell, Oliver Janz, Heather Jones,
                         Jennifer Keene, Alan Kramer, and Bill Nasson. Berlin: Freie Universität Berlin,
                         2014. https://doi.org/10.15463/ie1418.10268.
                     Erreygers, Guido, and Giovanni Di Bartolomeo. “The Debates on Eugenio
                         Rignano’s Inheritance Tax Proposals.” History of Political Economy 39, no. 4
                         (November 2007): 605–38. https://doi.org/10.1215/00182702-2007-034.
                     Espuelas, Sergio. “The Inequality Trap: A Comparative Analysis of Social Spend-
                         ing between 1880 and 1930.” Economic History Review 68, no. 2 (2015): 683–
                         706. https://www.jstor.org/stable/43910359.
                     Falciola, Luca. Il movimento del 1977 in Italia. First edition. Rome: Carocci Edi-
                         tore, 2015.
                     Farese, Giovanni. Luigi Einaudi: Un economista nella vita pubblica. Soveria Man-
                         nelli: Rubbettino, 2012.
                     Faucci, Riccardo. Luigi Einaudi. Turin: Unione tipografico-Editrice Torinese, 1986.
                     ———. A History of Italian Economic Thought. First edition. London: Routledge,
                         2014. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315780993.
                     Fausto, Domenicantonio. “I contributi di Umberto Ricci alla scienza delle fi-
                         nanze.” In Umberto Ricci (1879–1946): Economista militante e uomo combattivo,
                         217–43. Florence: Polistampa, 2004.
                     Fava, Andrea. “Assistenza e propaganda nel regime di guerra.” Operai e contadini
                         nella Grande Guerra, ed. Mario Isnenghi. Bologna: Cappelli Editore, 1982.



                     418




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   418        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     Favero, Giovanni. “Le statistiche dei salari industriali in periodo fascista.” Qua-
                        derni Storici(new series) 45, no. 134, 2 (2010): 319–57. https://www.jstor.org/
                        stable/43780007.
                     Federico, Giovanni, et al. “The Origins of the Italian Regional Divide: Evidence
                        from Real Wages, 1861–1913.” Journal of Economic History 79, no. 1 (March
                        2019): 63–98. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022050718000712.
                     Feinstein, C. H. National Income, Expenditure and Output of the United Kingdom,
                        1855–1965. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972.
                     Ferrera, Maurizio, and Elisabetta Gualmini. Rescued by Europe? Social and Labour
                        Market Reforms in Italy from Maastricht to Berlusconi. Amsterdam: Amster-
                        dam University Press, 2004.
                     Ferré-Sadurní, Luis, and Jesse McKinley. “N.Y. Hospitals Face $400 Million in
                        Cuts Even as Virus Battle Rages.” New York Times, March 30, 2020. https://
                        www.nytimes.com/2020/03/30/nyregion/coronavirus-hospitals-medicaid
                        -budget.html.
                     Flaschel, Peter, et al. “Kaleckian Investment and Employment Cycles in Post-War
                        Industrialized Economies.” In Mathematical Economics and the Dynamics of
                        Capitalism, ed. Peter Flaschel and Michael Landesmann. New York: Routledge,
                        2008.
                     Flora, Federico. La politica economica e finanziaria del fascismo (ottobre
                        1922–giugno 1923). Milan: Imperia, 1923. https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/
                        000959311.
                     Foley, Duncan K. Understanding Capital: Marx’s Economic Theory. Cambridge,
                        MA: Harvard University Press, 1986.
                     Forsyth, Douglas J. The Crisis of Liberal Italy: Monetary and Financial Policy, 1914–
                        1922. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
                     Forte, Francesco. L’economia liberale di Luigi Einaudi: Saggi. Florence: L. S.
                        Olschki, 2009.
                     Foster, John Bellamy, and Robert W. McChesney. The Endless Crisis: How
                        Monopoly-Finance Capital Produces Stagnation and Upheaval from the USA to
                        China. New York: Monthly Review Press, 2012.
                     Franchini, Vittorio. I comitati regionali per la mobilitazione industriale 1915–1918.
                        Milan: Alfieri, 1928.
                     ———. La mobilitazione industriale dell’Italia in guerra: Contributo alla storia
                        economica della guerra 1915–1918. Rome: Istituto Poligrafico e Zecca dello
                        Stato, 1932.
                     Franzosi, Roberto. “One Hundred Years of Strike Statistics: Methodological and
                        Theoretical Issues in Quantitative Strike Research.” Industrial and Labor Rela-
                        tions Review 42, no. 3 (1989): 348–62. https://doi.org/10.2307/2523393.
                     Frascani, Paolo. Politica economica e finanza pubblica in Italia nel primo dopo-
                        guerra (1918–1922). Naples: Giannini, 1975.
                     Gabbuti, Giacomo. A Noi! Income Inequality and Italian Fascism: Evidence
                        from Labour and Top Income Shares. Oxford Social History and Economics



                                                                                                      419




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   419        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                        Working Papers 177, University of Oxford, Department of Economics, 2020a.
                        https://econpapers.repec.org/paper/oxfesohwp/_5f177.htm.
                     ———. “When We Were Worse Off: The Economy, Living Standards and Inequal-
                        ity in Fascist Italy.” Rivista di storia economica no. 3 (2020b): 253–98. https://
                        doi.org/10.1410/100485.
                     ———. “Il fascismo ‘liberista’ e la ‘quasi abolizione’ dell’imposta di successione del
                        1923.” In Le sirene del corporativismo e l’isolamento dei dissidenti durante il fa-
                        scismo, ed. Piero Barucci et al. Florence: Firenze University Press, 2021. https://
                        doi.org/10.36253/978-88-5518-455-7.07.
                     Gabbuti, Giacomo, and Maria Gómez-León. “Wars, Depression, and Fascism: In-
                        come Inequality in Italy, 1900–1950.” Working paper D. T. 2104, Departamento
                        de Economía, Universidad Pública de Navarra, 2021.
                     Gallacher, William, and J. R. Campbell. Direct Action: An Outline of Workshop and
                        Social Organization. London: Pluto Press, 1972. First published December 1919
                        by the National Council of the Scottish Workers’ Committees, 1919.
                     Gallacher, William, and J. Paton. Toward Industrial Democracy—A Memoran-
                        dum on Workshop Control. Paisley, UK: Paisley Trades and Labour Council,
                        1918.
                     Gangemi, Lello. La politica finanziaria del governo Fascista (1922–1928). Florence:
                        R. Sandron, 1929.
                     Garside, W. R. British Unemployment, 1919–1939: A Study in Public Policy. Cam-
                        bridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
                     Gaukroger, Alan. “The Director of Financial Enquiries.” PhD thesis, University of
                        Huddersfield, 2008.
                     Giachetti, Diego. La FIAT in mano agli operai: L’autunno caldo del 1969. Pisa: BFS
                        Edizioni, 1999.
                     Giasi, Francesco, ed. Gramsci nel suo tempo. Rome: Carocci, 2008.
                     Giocoli, Nicola, and Nicolò Bellanca. Maffeo Pantaleoni: Il principe degli econo-
                        misti Italiani. Florence: Polistampa, 1998.
                     Giordano, Claire, and Francesco Zollino. “Long-Run Factor Accumulation and
                        Productivity Trends in Italy.” Journal of Economic Surveys 35, no. 1 (June 2020).
                        https://doi.org/10.1111/joes.12361.
                     Giorgi, Chiara, and Ilaria Pavan. Storia dello stato sociale in Italia. Bologna: Il
                        Mulino, 2021.
                     Gleason, Arthur. What the Workers Want: A Study of British Labor. New York:
                        Harcourt, Brace and Howe, 1920.
                     Gómez León, María, and Herman J. de Jong. “Inequality in Turbulent Times:
                        Income Distribution in Germany and Britain, 1900–50.” Economic History
                        Review 72, no. 3 (2018): 1073–98. https://doi.org/10.1111/ehr.12770.
                     Gordon, Charles, and Edouard Montpetit. The Genoa Conference for the Economic
                        and Financial Reconstruction of Europe: Joint Report of the Canadian Delegates.
                        Ottawa, Ont.: F. A. Acland, 1922.
                     Gramsci, Antonio. “To the Commissars of the Workshop of Fiat Centro and



                     420




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   420        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                            bibliography


                        Brevetti” [Ai Commissari di reparto delle Officine Fiat Centro e Brevetti].
                        L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 18 (September 13, 1919a): 140.
                     ———. “The Problem of the Internal Commission” [Il problema della Commis-
                        sioni interne]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 15 (August 23, 1919b): 117–18.
                     ———. “Syndicalism and the Councils” [Sindacalismo e Consigli]. L’Ordine
                        nuovo 1, no. 25 (November 8, 1919c): 191–92.
                     ———. “The Conquest of the State” [La conquista dello Stato]. L’Ordine nuovo 1,
                        no. 9 (July 12, 1919d): 64.
                     ———. “Postilla.” L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 15 (August 23, 1919e): 117.
                     ———. “The Programme of L’Ordine nuovo” [il programma dell’Ordine nuovo].
                        L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 12 (August 14, 1920a): 95.
                     ———. “Soviet and Workers’ Councils” [Soviet e Consigli di fabbrica]. L’Ordine
                        nuovo 1, no. 43 (April 3–10, 1920b): 340.
                     ———. “Chronicles of the New Order” [Cronache dell’Ordine Nuovo]. L’Ordine
                        nuovo 2, no. 16 (October 2, 1920c): 121.
                     ———. “The Factory Council” [Il consiglio di fabbrica]. L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 5
                        (June 5, 1920d): 25.
                     ———. “Socialism and Economics” [Socialismo ed economia]. L’Ordine nuovo 1,
                        no. 34 (January 17, 1920e): 265.
                     ———. “Superstition and Reality” [Superstizione e realtà]. L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 1
                        (May 8, 1920f): 2.
                     ———. “Toward a Renewal of the Socialist Party” [Per un rinnovamento del par-
                        tito socialista]. L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 1 (May 8, 1920g): 3.
                     ———. “The Turin Factory Council Movement.” L’Ordine nuovo, March 14, 1921.
                        Translated by Michael Carley. https://www.marxists.org/archive/gramsci/1921/
                        03/turin_councils.htm.
                     Gramsci, Antonio, with Palmiro Togliatti. “Workers’ democracy” [Democrazia
                        operaia]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 7 (June 21, 1919: 47–48).
                     Gramsci, Antonio, et al. Pre-Prison Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                        Press, 1994.
                     Great Britain, Royal Commission on Coal Industry. Reports and Minutes of Evi-
                        dence, Vol. 1: On the First Stage of the Inquiry. London: HMSO, 1919a.
                     ———. Reports and Minutes of Evidence, Vol. 2: On the Second Stage of the Inquiry.
                        London: HMSO, 1919b.
                     Grifone, Pietro. Il capitale finanziario in Italia. Turin: Einaudi, 1971.
                     Grilli, Vittorio, et al. “Political and Monetary Institutions and Public Financial
                        Policies in the Industrial Countries.” Economic Policy 6, no. 13 (1991): 342–92.
                        https://doi.org/10.2307/1344630.
                     Guarneri, Felice. Battaglie economiche tra le due grandi guerre. Milan: Garzanti, 1953.
                     Hamon, A. “The Workers’ Council in Britain” [I consigli degli operai in inghil-
                        terra]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 19 (September 20–27, 1919): 145.
                     Hannington, Wal. Industrial History in Wartime Including a Record of the Shop
                        Stewards’ Movement. London: Lawrence & Wishart Ltd., 1941.



                                                                                                        421




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   421        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                     Hargrave, John. Montagu Norman. New York: The Greystone Press, 1942.
                     Harvey, David. The Limits to Capital. Oxford: B. Blackwell, 1982.
                     Hawtrey, R. G. Good and Bad Trade. London: Constable & Co., 1913. https://
                        catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/001311354.
                     ———. Currency and Credit. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1919a. https://
                        babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.$b37816&view=1up&seq=7.
                     ———. “The Gold Standard.” Economic Journal 29, no. 116 (December 1919b):
                        428–42. https://doi.org/10.2307/2223352.
                     ———. Currency and Credit. 2nd edition. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1923.
                        https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/006646138.
                     ———. “Currency and Public Administration.” Public Administration 3, no. 3
                        (1925a): 232–45. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9299.1b02.
                     ———. “Public Expenditure and the Demand for Labour.” Economica 13 (March
                        1925b): 38–48. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2548008?seq=1.
                     ———. “Review of Central Banks, by C. H. Kisch and W. A. Elkin.” Economic
                        Journal 38, no. 151 (September 1928): 439–42.
                     ———. A Century of Bank Rate. London: Longmans, Green, 1938.
                     Helgadóttir, Oddný. “The Bocconi Boys Go to Brussels: Italian Economic Ideas,
                        Professional Networks and European Austerity.” Journal of European Public
                        Policy 23, no. 3 (March 2016): 392–409. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2015
                        .1106573.
                     Henderson, H. D. “The Reports of the Coal Industry Commission.” Economic
                        Journal 29, no. 115 (1919): 265–79.
                     Henwood, Doug. After the New Economy. New York: New Press, 2003.
                     Hinton, James. The First Shop Stewards’ Movement. London: G. Allen & Unwin,
                        1973.
                     His Majesty’s Stationery Office. War Cabinet Report for the Year 1917. Cmd. 9005,
                        1918a. House of Commons Parliamentary Papers online.
                     ———. First Interim Report of the Committee on Currency and Foreign Exchange
                        after the War. Cmd. 9182. London: HMSO, 1918b.
                     ———. War Cabinet Report for the Year 1918. Cmd. 325, 1919a. House of Commons
                        Parliamentary Papers online.
                     ———. Report of the Provisional Joint Committee Presented to Meeting of Industrial
                        Conference. Cmd. 501, 1919b. House of Commons Parliamentary Papers online.
                     ———. Final Report of the Committee on Currency and Foreign Exchange after the
                        War. Cmd. 464, 1919c.
                     ———. “Draft Resolutions on Economy.” Cab 23/23. Meeting of the Cabinet,
                        December 8, 1920, 10 Downing Street. http://filestore.nationalarchives.gov.uk/
                        pdfs/small/cab-23-23-cc-67-20-12.pdf.
                     ———. Finance: Minutes, Records of Cabinet Committees, 1919–1922. Finance
                        Committee, June 30, 1921. Cab 24/201/27, fols. 58–65.
                     ———. “Reports of the Committee of Experts Appointed by the Currency and
                        Exchange Sub-commission of the Financial Commission.” Cmd. 1650, 1922a.



                     422




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   422        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     ———. First Interim Report of the Committee on National Expenditure. Cmd. 1581,
                        1922b.
                     ———. Second Interim Report of the Committee on National Expenditure. Cmd.
                        1582, 1922c.
                     ———. Third Report of the Committee on National Expenditure. Cmd. 1589, 1922d.
                     ———. Report of the Committee on National Debt and Taxation. Cmd. 2800, 1927.
                        http://hdl.handle.net/2027/mdp.39015036796954.
                     ———. “Memorandum on Unemployment,” by Sir William Joynson-Hicks. Cab
                        24/201, June 13 to July 9, 1929. http://filestore.nationalarchives.gov.uk/pdfs/
                        large/cab-24-204.pdf.
                     Hobsbawm, E. J. Industry and Empire: From 1750 to the Present Day. New York:
                        Penguin Books, 1999.
                     Hodges, Frank. Nationalization of the Mines. New York: Thomas Seltzer, Inc.,
                        1920.
                     Hood, Christopher, and Rozana Himaz. “The UK Geddes Axe of the 1920s in
                        Perspective.” In When the Party’s Over: The Politics of Fiscal Squeeze in Perspec-
                        tive, ed. Christopher Hood, David Heald, and Rozana Himaz. Oxford: British
                        Academy, 2014. British Academy Scholarship Online, 2015. https://doi.org/10
                        .5871/bacad/9780197265734.003.0004.
                     Howson, Susan. “‘A Dear Money Man’?: Keynes on Monetary Policy, 1920.” Eco-
                        nomic Journal 83, no. 330 (1973): 456–64. https://doi.org/10.2307/2231181.
                     ———. “The Origins of Dear Money, 1919–20.” Economic History Review 27, no. 1
                        (1974): 88–107.
                     ———. Domestic Monetary Management in Britain, 1919–38. Cambridge: Cam-
                        bridge University Press, 1975.
                     ———. “Monetary Theory and Policy in the Twentieth Century: The Career of
                        R. G. Hawtrey.” In Proceedings of the Seventh International Economic History
                        Conference, ed. M. Flinn, 505–12. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1978.
                     ———. “Hawtrey and the Real World.” In Keynes and His Contemporaries, ed. G.
                        C. Harcourt, 142–88. London: Macmillan, 1985a.
                     ———. “Review of The Making of Keynes’ General Theory, by Richard F. Kahn.”
                        Journal of Economic History 45, no. 4 (1985b): 1023–24. https://doi.org/10.1017/
                        S0022050700035610.
                     Howson, Susan, and Donald Winch. The Economic Advisory Council, 1930–1939: A
                        Study in Economic Advice during Depression and Recovery. Cambridge: Cam-
                        bridge University Press, 1977.
                     Hurwitz, Samuel Justin. State Intervention in Great Britain: A Study of Economic
                        Control and Social Response, 1914–1919. New York: Columbia University Press,
                        1949.
                     Inman, Phillip, and Robert Booth. “Poverty Increases among Children and Pen-
                        sioners across UK.” The Guardian (US edition), March 28, 2019. https://www
                        .theguardian.com/society/2019/mar/28/poverty-increases-among-children
                        -and-pensioners-across-uk.



                                                                                                      423




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   423        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                     International Labor Organization. World Employment and Social Outlook Trends
                         2021. 2021. https://www.ilo.org/global/research/global-reports/weso/trends
                         2021/lang--en/index.htm.
                     Invernizzi-Accetti, Carlo. What Is Christian Democracy? Politics, Religion and
                         Ideology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019.
                     Isnenghi, Mario, ed. Operai e contadini nella grande guerra. Bologna: Cappelli,
                         1982.
                     Istituto Nazionale di Statistica. “Calcolo della soglia di povertà assoluta.” Dati
                         analisi e prodotti. Last updated February 2, 2021. https://www.istat.it/it/dati
                         -analisi-e-prodotti/contenuti-interattivi/soglia-di-poverta.
                     ———. “Le statistiche dell’istat sulla povertà, anno 2020: Torna a crescere la
                         povertà assoluta.” Statistiche report, la povertà in Italia. June 16, 2021. https://
                         www.istat.it/it/files/2021/06/REPORT_POVERTA_2020.pdf.
                     Istituto Nazionale Fascista Infortuni. Rassegna della previdenza sociale 10, no. 6
                         (1923): 120. Rome: Cassa Nazionale Fascista Infortuni.
                     Ives, Martyn. Reform, Revolution and Direct Action amongst British Miners: The
                         Struggle for the Charter in 1919. Leiden: Brill, 2016.
                     Jacchia, Arturo. “Workers’ Life” [Vita Operaia]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 9 (July 12,
                         1919): 66.
                     Jason (Pseud.). Past and Future. London: Chatto & Windus, 1918.
                     Jepsen, Maria, ed. Benchmarking Working Europe 2019. Brussels: European Trade
                         Union Institute, 2019. https://www.etui.org/publications/books/benchmarking
                         -working-europe-2019.
                     Johnson, Paul Barton. Land Fit for Heroes: The Planning of British Reconstruction,
                         1916–1919. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1968.
                     Jones, Thomas. Whitehall Diary. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1969.
                     Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor. 2017. “Macrofinancial His-
                         tory and the New Business Cycle Facts.” In NBER Macroeconomics Annual
                         2016, vol. 31, ed. Martin Eichenbaum and Jonathan A. Parker. Chicago: Univer-
                         sity of Chicago Press, 2017.
                     Joslyn, Carl S. “The British Building Guilds: A Critical Survey of Two Years’
                         Work.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 37, no. 1 (1922): 75–133. https://doi.org/
                         10.2307/1885910.
                     Kalecki, M. “Political Aspects of Full Employment.” Political Quarterly 14, no. 4
                         (1943): 322–30. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-923X.1b01.
                     Kelton, Stephanie. The Deficit Myth: Modern Monetary Theory and the Birth of the
                         People’s Economy. New York: Public Affairs, 2020.
                     Kendall, Walter. The Revolutionary Movement in Britain 1900–1921: The Origins of
                         British Communism. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1969.
                     Keynes, John Maynard. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.
                         London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1964.
                     ———. The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes. New York: St. Martin’s
                         Press, for the Royal Economic Society, 1971.



                     424




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   424        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     ———. The Economic Consequences of the Peace. London: Taylor and Francis, Ltd.;
                        New York: Routledge, 2017.
                     Kirby, M. W. The British Coal Mining Industry, 1870–1946: A Political and Eco-
                        nomic History. London: Macmillan, 1977.
                     Klein, Naomi. The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism. London: Pica-
                        dor, 2008.
                     Kreis, Steven. The Diffusion of an Idea: A History of Scientific Management in Brit-
                        ain, 1890–1945. PhD diss., University of Missouri-Columbia, 1990.
                     Krugman, Paul. “The Case for Cuts Was a Lie. Why Does Britain Still Believe It?
                        The Austerity Delusion.” The Guardian (US edition), April 29, 2015. https://
                        www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/apr/29/the-austerity
                        -delusion
                     Labanca, Nicola, and Giovanna Procacci. Caporetto. Esercito, stato e società. Flor-
                        ence: Giunti Editore, 2018.
                     Labour Party (Great Britain), Executive Committee. Labour and the New Social
                        Order: A Report on Reconstruction. London: Labour Party, 1918.
                     ———. Report of the Nineteenth Annual Conference of the Labour Party, June 25,
                        1919. Nottingham and London: Labour Party, 1919.
                     La Francesca, Salvatore. La politica economica del Fascismo. Bari: Laterza, 1972.
                     Laidler, David. “Hawtrey and the Origins of the Chicago Tradition.” Journal of
                        Political Economy 10, no. 6 (1993): 1068–1103.
                     Lakner, Christoph, et al. Updated Estimates of the Impact of COVID-19 on Global
                        Poverty: Looking Back at 2020 and the Outlook for 2021. World Bank blogs,
                        January 11, 2021. https://blogs.worldbank.org/opendata/updated-estimates
                        -impact-covid-19-global-poverty-looking-back-2020-and-outlook-2021.
                     Lay, Adriana, Dora Marucco, and Maria Luisa Pesante. “Classe operaia e scio-
                        peri: Ipotesi per il periodo 1880–1923.” Quaderni storici 8, no. 22/1 (1973):
                        87–147.
                     League of Nations. Brussels Financial Conference 1920. 5 vols. London: Printed for
                        the League of Nations by Harrison and Sons, Ltd., 1920–1921. [Cited in text as
                        Brussels 1920, followed by volume and page numbers.]
                     ———. Three Months of the League of Nations. Boston: World Peace Foundation,
                        1920.
                     ———. Report of the Advisory Committee, International Financial Conference 1920.
                        London: Printed for the League of Nations by Harrison & Sons, 1920.
                     Levrero, E., and Antonella Stirati. “Real Wages in Italy 1970–2000: Elements for
                        an Interpretation.” Economia & lavoro 38, no. 1 (2004): 65–89. https://www
                        .semanticscholar.org/paper/Real-Wages-in-Italy-1970-20003A-Elements-for
                        -an-Levrero-Stirati/e9c0e323e752d32e326b4d19a1ce93e0da19bd18.
                     Lloyd, E. M. H. Experiments in State Control at the War Office and the Ministry of
                        Food. London: H. Milford, 1924.
                     ———. “Gold and Coal.” New Statesman 25, no. 639 (July 25, 1925).
                     Lunghini, G., and Stefano Lucarelli. The Resistible Rise of Mainstream Econom-



                                                                                                     425




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   425        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                        ics: The Dominant Theory and the Alternative Economic Theories. Bergamo:
                        University of Bergamo Press, 2012.
                     Lyttelton, Adrian. The Seizure of Power: Fascism in Italy, 1919–1929. New York:
                        Scribner, 1973.
                     Macfarlane, L. J. “Hands off Russia: British Labour and the Russo-Polish War,
                        1920.” Past & Present 38 (December 1967): 126–52.
                     Macnicol, John. The Politics of Retirement in Britain, 1878–1948. Cambridge: Cam-
                        bridge University Press, 2002.
                     MacRae, C. Duncan. “A Political Model of the Business Cycle.” Journal of Political
                        Economy 85, no. 2 (1977): 239–63. https://www.jstor.org/stable/1830790.
                     Magnani, Alberto. “Retribuzioni, calo del 4,3 in 7 anni. Perché il problema
                        dell’Italia sono gli stipendi.” Il Sole 24 Ore, February 17, 2019. https://www
                        .ilsole24ore.com/art/retribuzioni--calo-43percento-7-anni-perche-problema
                        -dell-italia-sono-stipendi--ABWtwpSB?refresh_ce=1.
                     Maione, Giuseppe. Il Biennio Rosso: Autonomia e spontaneità operaia nel 1919–
                        1920. Bologna: Il Mulino, 1975.
                     Manestra, Stefano. A Short History of Tax Compliance in Italy. Questioni di Econo-
                        mia e Finanza 81, December 2010. https://www.bancaditalia.it/pubblicazioni/
                        qef/2010-0081/QEF_81.pdf.
                     Mankiw, N. Gregory. Principles of Microeconomics. 5th edition. Boston: South-
                        Western Cengage Learning, 2009.
                     Mann, Geoff. In the Long Run We Are All Dead: Keynesianism, Political Economy,
                        and Revolution. New York: Verso, 2017.
                     Marchionatti, Roberto. Economic Theory in the Twentieth Century: An Intellectual
                        History, Vol. 2. Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, 2021.
                     Marcoaldi, Franco. “Maffeo Pantaleoni, la riforma finanziaria e il governo fascista
                        nel periodo dei pieni poteri, attraverso le lettere ad Alberto De’ Stefani.” Annali
                        della Fondazione Luigi Einaudi 14 (1980): 609–66.
                     ———. Vent’anni di economia e politica: Le carte De’ Stefani, 1922–1941. Milan:
                        FrancoAngeli, 1986.
                     Marucco, Dora. “Alle origini del Ministero del Lavoro e della Previdenza Sociale
                        in Italia [Electronic Resource].” Il Mulino (The Mill) (2008): 179–90. https://doi
                        .org/10.1411/27173.
                     Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels. Selected Works. Moscow: Progress Publishers,
                        1969–1970. First published in 1888.
                     Mattei, Clara Elisabetta. “The Conceptual Roots of Contemporary Austerity Doc-
                        trine: A New Perspective on the ‘British Treasury View.’” New School Economic
                        Review (NSER) 8 (2016). https://nsereview.org/index.php/NSER/issue/view/8.
                     ———. “Austerity and Repressive Politics: Italian Economists in the Early Years of
                        the Fascist Government.” European Journal of the History of Economic Thought
                        24, no. 5 (September 2017): 998–1026. https://doi.org/10.1080/09672567.2017
                        .1301510.
                     ———. “Hawtrey, Austerity, and the ‘Treasury View,’ 1918 to 1925.” Journal of the



                     426




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   426        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                       History of Economic Thought 40, no. 4 (2018a): 471–92. https://doi.org/10.1017/
                       S1053837218000068.
                     ———. “Treasury View and Post-WWI British Austerity: Basil Blackett, Otto
                       Niemeyer and Ralph Hawtrey.” Cambridge Journal of Economics 42, no. 4 (July
                       2018b): 1123–44. https://doi.org/10.1093/cje/bex061.
                     Matteotti, G. “La questione tributaria.” Critica Sociale 29, nos. 6-7 (1919): 82–83.
                     Mattesini, F., and B. Quintieri. “Does a Reduction in the Length of the Work-
                       ing Week Reduce Unemployment? Some Evidence from the Italian Economy
                       during the Great Depression.” Explorations in Economic History 43, no. 3 (July
                       2006): 413–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2005.04.001.
                     McDonald, Andrew. “The Geddes Committee and the Formulation of Public
                       Expenditure Policy, 1921–1922.” The Historical Journal 32, no. 3 (1989): 643–74.
                     McKibbin, Ross. The Evolution of the Labour Party, 1910–1924. Oxford: Oxford
                       University Press, 1974.
                     ———. The Ideologies of Class: Social Relations in Britain, 1880–1950. New York:
                       Oxford University Press, 1990.
                     Medlicott, W. N., et al., eds. Documents on British Foreign Policy, 1919–1939. Lon-
                       don: His Majesty’s Stationery Office, 1974.
                     Melis, G. La macchina imperfetta. Immagine e realtà dello Stato fascista. Bologna:
                       Il Mulino, 2018.
                     Menozzi, Daniele, et al., eds. Un paese in guerra: La mobilitazione civile in Italia,
                       1914–1918. First edition. Milan: Edizioni Unicopli, 2010.
                     Michelini, Luca. “Il pensiero di Maffeo Pantaleoni tra economia politica e politica
                       militante.” Societá e storia 58 (1992).
                     ———. Marginalismo e socialismo: Maffeo Pantaleoni, 1882–1904. Milan: Fran-
                       coAngeli, 1998.
                     ———. Alle origini dell’antisemitismo nazional-fascista: Maffeo Pantaleoni e ‘la vita
                       Italiana’ di Giovanni Preziosi, 1915–1924. Venice: Marsilio, 2011a. https://www
                       .academia.edu/42658223/Alle_origini_dellantisemitismo_nazional_fascista
                       _Maffeo_Pantaleoni_e_La_Vita_italiana_di_Giovanni_Preziosi_1915_1924.
                     ———. Marxismo, liberismo, rivoluzione: Saggio sul Giovane Gramsci, 1915–1920.
                       Milan: La Città del Sole, 2011b.
                     ———. Il nazionalismo economico Italiano: Corporativismo, liberismo, fascismo:
                       (1900–23). Rome: Carocci Editore, 2019.
                     ———. “From Nationalism to Fascism: Protagonists and Journals.” In An Insti-
                       tutional History of Italian Economics in the Interwar Period—Volume II, ed.
                       Massimo M. Augello et al., 21–57. New York: Springer International Publish-
                       ing, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-38331-2_2.
                     Middlemas, Keith. Politics in Industrial Society: The Experience of the British Sys-
                       tem since 1911. London: A. Deutsch, 1979.
                     Middleton, Roger. Towards the Managed Economy. New York: Routledge, 1985.
                       https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315019567.
                     Migone, Gian Giacomo. The United States and Fascist Italy: The Rise of American



                                                                                                      427




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   427        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                        Finance in Europe. First English edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                        Press, 2015.
                     Milanovic, Branko. Income, Inequality, and Poverty during the Transition from
                        Planned to Market Economy (English). World Bank Regional and Sectoral
                        Studies. Washington, DC: World Bank Group, 1998. https://documents
                        .worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/
                        229251468767984676/Income-inequality-and-poverty-during-the-transition
                        -from-planned-to-market-economy.
                     ———. Capitalism, Alone: The Future of the System that Rules the World. Cam-
                        bridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2019.
                     Miliband, Ralph. Parliamentary Socialism: A Study in the Politics of Labour. Lon-
                        don: Allen & Unwin, 1961.
                     ———. The State in Capitalist Society. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1969.
                     Miller, Earl Joyce. “Workmen’s Representation in Industrial Government.” PhD
                        thesis, University of Illinois, 1922. Reprinted in University of Illinois Studies in
                        the Social Sciences 10, nos. 3–4 (1924).
                     Millis, H. A. “The British Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act, 1927.” Journal
                        of Political Economy 36, no. 3 (1928): 305–29. https://www.jstor.org/stable/
                        1822749.
                     Ministero dell’Economia Nazionale. I conflitti del lavoro in Italia nel decennio
                        1914–1923 (dati statistici). Rome: “Grafia” SAI industrie grafiche, 1924.
                     Ministero delle Finanze. L’azione dello stato Italiano per le opere pubbliche (1862–
                        1924). Rome: Libreria dello stato, 1925.
                     Ministero per il Lavoro e la Previdenza Sociale. Bollettino del lavoro e della previ-
                        denza sociale, vol. 39, no. 1. Rome: Tipografia Cooperativa Sociale, 1923.
                     Ministero per l’Assistenza Militare e le Pensioni di Guerra, ed. L’assistenza di
                        guerra in Italia: assistenza militare, pensioni di guerra. Rome: Società Anonima
                        Poligrafica Italiana, 1919.
                     Ministry of Labour. Industrial Councils. The Whitley Report. London: HMSO, 1917.
                     ———. Report of the Committee of Enquiry on the Employment Exchanges. Cmd.
                        1054, 1920.
                     Ministry of Reconstruction. Interim Report of the Committee on Adult Education.
                        Cd. 9107. London: HMSO, 1918. https://archive.org/details/cu31924032188751.
                     ———. Adult Education Committee Final Report. Cmd. 321. London: HMSO, 1919a.
                     ———. Report of the Women’s Employment Committee. Cd. 9239, 1919b.
                     Ministry of Reconstruction Advisory Council. Women’s Housing Sub-Committee
                        Final Report. Cd. 9232. London: HMSO, 1919.
                     Miozzi, U. Massimo. La mobilitazione industriale italiana (1915–1918). Rome: La
                        Goliardica, 1980.
                     Mirowski, Philip, and Dieter Plehwe, eds. The Road from Mont Pèlerin: The Mak-
                        ing of the Neoliberal Thought Collective, with a New Preface. First Harvard
                        University Press paperback edition. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
                        Press, 2015.



                     428




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   428        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     Missiroli, Mario. Una battaglia perduta. Milan: Corbaccio, 1924.
                     Mitchell, B. R. International Historical Statistics: Europe, 1750–1993. 14th edition.
                        London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1998.
                     Mittnik, Stefan, and Willi Semmler. “Regime Dependence of the Fiscal Multi-
                        plier.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 83, no. 3, The Great Reces-
                        sion: Motivation for Re-thinking Paradigms in Macroeconomic Modeling
                        (August 1, 2012): 502–22. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jebo.2012.02.005.
                     Moggridge, D. E. (Donald Edward). British Monetary Policy, 1924–1931, the Nor-
                        man Conquest of $4.86. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1972.
                     ———. John Maynard Keynes. New York: Penguin Books, 1976.
                     Montagna, Mario. “The Reverse of the Medal” [Il rovescio della medaglia].
                        L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 26 (November 15, 1919): 202–3.
                     Montgomery, David. The Fall of the House of Labor: The Workplace, the State, and
                        American Labor Activism, 1865–1925. First edition. Cambridge: Cambridge
                        University Press, 1987. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511528774.
                     Monthly Labour Review. “The Housing Situation in England.” Monthly Labor
                        Review 12, no. 1 (January 1921): 213–21. https://www.jstor.org/stable/41827945.
                     Moraglio, M. “Dentro e fuori il manicomio. L’assistenza psichiatrica in Italia tra le
                        due guerre.” Contemporanea 9 (2006): 15–34.
                     Moreolo, Carlo Svaluto. “Carlo Cottarelli: ‘There’s No Spending Your Way out of
                        Debt.’” IPE Magazine (July/August2018). https://www.ipe.com/carlo-cottarelli
                        -theres-no-spending-your-way-out-of-debt/10025492.article.
                     Morgan, E. Victor. Studies in British Financial Policy, 1914–25. London: Macmillan,
                        1952.
                     Morgan, Jane. Conflict and Order: The Police and Labor Disputes in England and
                        Wales, 1900–1939. New York: Clarendon Press, 1987.
                     Morgan, Kenneth. Consensus and Disunity: The Lloyd George Coalition Govern-
                        ment 1918–1922. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979.
                     Morgan, Kenneth O., and Jane Morgan. Portrait of a Progressive: The Political Career
                        of Christopher, Viscount Addison. New York: Oxford University Press, 1980.
                     Mortara, Giorgio. Prospettive economiche. Città di Castello: Societá Tipografica
                        “Leonardo da Vinci,” 1922.
                     Mosca, Manuela. “ ‘Io che sono Darwinista.’ La visione di Maffeo Pantaleoni” (“I
                        Am a Darwinist.” Maffeo Pantaleoni’s Vision). Il pensiero economico Italiano
                        23, no. 1 (2015): 23–45. https://ideas.repec.org/a/pei/journl/v23y201512p23-45
                        .html.
                     Mowat, Charles Loch. Britain between the Wars, 1918–1940. London: Methuen,
                        1955.
                     Murphy, John Thomas. The Workers’ Committee, An Outline of Its Principles and
                        Structure. Sheffield: Sheffield Workers’ Committee, 1917.
                     ———. New Horizons. London: John Lane The Bodley Head, 1941.
                     Musso, Stefano. Storia del lavoro in Italia: Dall’unità a oggi. Venice: Marsilio,
                        2002.



                                                                                                      429




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   429        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                     Mussolini, Benito. Discorsi sulla politica economica Italiana nel primo decennio.
                        Rome: Edito a cura dell’Istituto italiano di credito marittimo, 1933.
                     Natoli, Claudio. “Primo settembre, occupazione delle fabbriche.” In Calendario
                        civile, per una memoria laica, popolare e democratica degli Italiani, ed. Ales-
                        sandro Portelli, 189–201. Rome: Donzelli Editore, 2017.
                     Nenni, Pietro. Storia di quattro anni: 1919–1922. 2nd edition. Turin: G. Einaudi, 1946.
                     Niemeyer, Otto Ernst. Report Submitted to the Brazilian Government. Rio de
                        Janeiro: S. I., 1931.
                     Nordhaus, William D. “The Political Business Cycle.” Review of Economic Studies
                        42, no. 2 (1975): 169–90. https://doi.org/10.2307/2296528.
                     North, Douglass C., and Robert Paul Thomas. The Rise of the Western World: A
                        New Economic History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973.
                     Ostergaard, Geoffrey. The Tradition of Workers’ Control: Selected Writings. Lon-
                        don: Freedom Press, 1997.
                     Oxfam. “IMF Paves Way for New Era of Austerity Post-COVID-19.” Oxfam
                        International, 11 December 2020. https://www.oxfam.org/en/press-releases/imf
                        -paves-way-new-era-austerity-post-covid-19.
                     Paggi, Leonardo. Le strategie del potere in Gramsci: Tra fascismo e socialismo in un
                        solo paese, 1923–1926. Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1984.
                     Pantaleoni, Maffeo. Pure Economics. London: Macmillan, 1898.
                     ———. Corso di economia politica: Lezioni dell’anno 1909–1910 redatte dal Dott.
                        Carlo Manes. Rome: Associazione Universitaria Romana, 1910.
                     ———. “Note.” In Margine alla guerra. Bari: Laterza, 1917.
                     ———. Politica: Criteri ed eventi. Bari: G. Laterza, 1918.
                     ———. La fine provvisoria di un’Epopea. Bari: Laterza, 1919.
                     ———. Bolcevismo Italiano. Bari: G. Laterza, 1922. http://archive.org/details/
                        BolscevismoItaliano.
                     ———. “Finanza fascista.” Politica 15, nos. 44–45 (1923): 159–87.
                     Park, Emma, Derek R. Peterson, Anne Pitcher, and Keith Breckenridge. “Intellec-
                        tual and Cultural Work in Times of Austerity.” Africa 91, no. 4 (2021).
                     Parrillo, F. “Profilo di Alberto De Stefani.” Rivista bancaria 12 (1984): 586–89.
                     Pavan, Ilaria. “ ‘Nelle Trincee e sui campi.’ Guerra, dopoguerra e stato sociale in
                        Italia (1917–1921).” In La libertà del lavoro: Storia, diritto, società, ed. Laura
                        Cerasi. Palermo: New Digital frontiers, 2016.
                     ———. “War and the Welfare State: The Case of Italy, from WWI to Fascism.”
                        Historia contemporanea 61 (2019): 835–72.
                     Peden, G. C. “Sir Richard Hopkins and the ‘Keynesian Revolution’ in Employ-
                        ment Policy, 1929–45.” Economic History Review 36, no. 2 (1983a): 281–96.
                     ———. “The Treasury as the Central Department of Government, 1919–1939.”
                        Citation Public Administration 61, no. 4 (1983b): 371–85.
                     ———. “The ‘Treasury View’ on Public Works and Employment in the Interwar
                        Period.” Economic History Review 37, no. 2 (1984): 167–81. https://doi.org/10
                        .2307/2596879.



                     430




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   430        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                             bibliography


                     ———. British Economic and Social Policy: Lloyd George to Margaret Thatcher.
                        Deddington, Oxfordshire: P. Allan, 1985.
                     ———. “The Road to and from Gairloch: Lloyd George, Unemployment, Inflation,
                        and the ‘Treasury View’ in 1921.” Twentieth Century British History 4, no. 3
                        (1993): 224–49. https://doi.org/10.1093/tcbh/4.3.224.
                     ———. “The Treasury View in the Interwar Period: An Example of Political
                        Economy?” In Unemployment and the Economists, ed. Bernard Corry. Chelten-
                        ham, UK: Edward Elgar, 1996.
                     ———. The Treasury and British Public Policy, 1906–1959. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
                        sity Press, 2000.
                     ———, ed. Keynes and His Critics: Treasury Responses to the Keynesian Revolution,
                        1925–1946. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004a.
                     ———. “The Treasury and the City.” In The British Government and the City of
                        London in the Twentieth Century, by Philip Williamson and R. C. Michie.
                        Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004b.
                     Pedersen, Susan. “Gender, Welfare, and Citizenship in Britain during the Great
                        War.” American Historical Review 95, no. 4 (1990): 983–1006. https://doi.org/10
                        .2307/2163475.
                     ———. Family, Dependence, and the Origins of the Welfare State: Britain and
                        France, 1914–1945. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.
                     Peli, Santo. “La fabbrica militarizzata.” In Gli Italiani in guerra: Conflitti, identità,
                         memorie dal risorgimento ai nostri giorni, ed. Mario Isnenghi and Daniele
                         Ceschin, vol. 3, 662–69. Turin: UTET, 2008.
                     Pelling, Henry. History of British Trade Unionism. London: Palgrave Macmillan,
                         1987.
                     Pennacchi, Antonio. Canale Mussolini: Romanzo. Milan: Mondadori, 2010.
                     Perotti, Roberto. The “Austerity Myth”: Gain without Pain? Working Paper 17571,
                         National Bureau of Economic Research, November 2011. https://doi.org/10
                         .3386/w17571.
                     Pietravalle, Michele. “Per un ministero della sanità ed assistenza pubblica in
                         Italia.” Nuova antologia 54, no. 1131 (March 1919): 103–17.
                     Pigou, A. C. Aspects of British Economic History: 1918–1925. London: Routledge,
                         1947. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315409979.
                     Piketty, Thomas, and Arthur Goldhammer. Capital in the Twenty-First Century.
                         Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 2014.
                     Polanyi, Karl. The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of
                         Our Time. Boston: Beacon Press, 1944.
                     Pollard, Sidney. The Development of the British Economy, 1914–1967. 2nd edition,
                         revised. London: Edward Arnold, 1969.
                     Porisini, Giorgio. Il capitalismo Italiano nella prima guerra mondiale. First edition.
                         Florence: La Nuova Italia, 1975.
                     Pratt, E. L. Industrial Unionism. London: Solidarity Press, 1917.
                     Preti, A., and C. Venturoli. “Fascismo e stato sociale.” In Povertà e innovazioni



                                                                                                          431




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   431        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.               6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                        istituzionali in Italia. Dal Medioevo ad oggi, ed. V. Zamagni, 729–49. Bologna:
                        Il Mulino, 2000.
                     Pribićević, Branko. The Shop Stewards’ Movement and Workers’ Control, 1910–1922.
                        Oxford: Blackwell, 1959.
                     Price, Carter C., and Kathryn A. Edwards. “Trends in Income from 1975 to 2018.”
                        RAND Corporation Working Paper WR-A516-1, 2020. https://www.rand.org/
                        pubs/working_papers/WRA516-1.html.
                     Procacci, G., ed. Stato e classe operaia in Italia durante la prima guerra mondiale.
                        Milan: FrancoAngeli, 1983.
                     ———. Dalla rassegnazione alla rivolta: Mentalità e comportamenti popolari nella
                        grande guerra. Rome: Bulzoni, 1999.
                     ———. Warfare-Welfare: Intervento dello stato e diritti dei cittadini (1914–18).
                        Rome: Carocci, 2013.
                     Procacci, Giovanna, and P. Corner. “The Italian Experience of Total Mobiliza-
                        tion 1915–1920.” In State Society and Mobilization in Europe during the First
                        World War, ed. John Horne, 223–41. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
                        1997.
                     Ragioneria Generale dello Stato (RGS). “La spesa del balancio dello stato dall’u-
                        nità d’Italia, anni 1862–2009.” Excel spreadsheet, 2011, included in Ministero
                        dell’Economia e della Finanze, 150o Anniversario RGS, “La spesa dello stato
                        dall’unità d’Italia.” https://www.rgs.mef.gov.it/VERSIONE-I/pubblicazioni/
                        pubblicazioni_statistiche/la_spesa_dello_stato_dallunit_dItalia/.
                     Rattner, Steven. “Volcker Asserts US Must Trim Living Standard.” Special to
                        the New York Times, October 18, 1979. https://www.nytimes.com/1979/10/18/
                        archives/volcker-asserts-us-must-trim-living-standard-warns-of-inflation
                        .html.
                     Redmayne, R. A. S. The British Coal-Mining Industry during the War. Oxford:
                        Clarendon Press and H. Milford, 1923.
                     Ricci, Umberto. “Rassegna del movimento scientifico: Economia.” Giornale degli
                        economisti 34 (February 1907, series II): 152–63.
                     ———. “Rassegna del movimento scientifico: Economia.” Giornale degli econo-
                        misti 36 (May 1908, series II): 385–405. https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id
                        =umn.31951001908034l&view=1up&seq=16.
                     ———. Politica ed economia. Rome: Società Anonima Editrice “La Voce,” 1919.
                     ———. La politica economica del ministero Nitti: Gli effetti dell’intervento econo-
                        mico dello stato. Rome: Società Anonima Editrice “La Voce,” 1920.
                     ———. Il fallimento della politica annonaria. Rome: Società Anonima Editrice “La
                        Voce,” 1921.
                     ———. “Il miglioramento del bilancio dello stato.” Rivista di politica economica 13,
                        no. 6 (1923): 593–612.
                     ———. Dal protezionismo al sindacalismo. Bari: Laterza, 1926.
                     ———. “La scienza e la vita.” Nuovi studi di diritto, economia e politica 6, no. 3
                        (1928): 220–25.



                     432




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   432        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     ———. Tre economisti Italiani: Pantaleoni, Pareto, Loria. Bari: Laterza, 1939.
                     ———. La finanza dello stato egiziano nell’ultimo decennio. Estratto da “studi eco-
                         nomici finanziari e corporativi” 19, no. 3 (October). Rome: Edizioni Italiane,
                         1941.
                     ———. Saggi sul risparmio. Lanciano: Carabba, 1999.
                     Ricciardi, Mario. Lezioni di storia sindacale Italia, 1945–1985. Bologna: CLUEB,
                         1986.
                     Rigola, Rinaldo. “Le classi operaie e le assicurazioni sociali.” Rassegna sociale.
                         Rivista mensile della cassa nazionale d’assicurazione per gli infortuni degli
                         operai sul lavoro 5, no. 1 (1918): 1–13.
                     Rocca, G. “L’occupazione delle terre ‘incolte.’” La riforma sociale (May-June 1920):
                         221–52.
                     Romeo, Rosario. Breve storia della grande industria in Italia: 1861–1961. 4th edi-
                         tion, revised and expanded. Bologna: Cappelli, 1972.
                     Rosboch, Ettore. “L’azionariato di stato nell’economia fascista.” Lo stato 1, no. 3
                         (1930): 253–58.
                     Rossi, Ernesto. I padroni del vapore. Bari: Laterza, 1955.
                     Rubin, Gerry R. War, Law, and Labour: The Munition Acts, State Regulation, and
                         the Unions, 1915–1921. New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.
                     Saez, Emmanuel, and Gabriel Zucman. The Triumph of Injustice: How the Rich
                         Dodge Taxes and How to Make Them Pay. First edition. New York: W. W.
                         Norton, 2019.
                     Salter, J. Arthur. Allied Shipping Control: An Experiment in International Adminis-
                         tration. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1921.
                     Salvemini, Gaetano. La dittatura fascista in Italia. New York: Libreria del Nuovo
                         mondo, 1929.
                     ———. Under the Axe of Fascism. New York: Viking Press, 1936.
                     ———. Le origini del fascismo in Italia: “Lezioni di Harvard.” First edition. Milan:
                         Feltrinelli, 1966.
                     Samuel, Herbert. “The Taxation of the Various Classes of the People.” Journal of
                         the Royal Statistical Society 82, no. 2 (1919).
                     Santhià, Battista. Con Gramsci all’Ordine nuovo. Biblioteca della Resistenza 7.
                         Rome: Editori Riuniti, 1956.
                     Sayers, R. S. The Bank of England, 1891–1944. Cambridge: Cambridge University
                         Press, 1976.
                     Scholliers, Peter, and Vera Zamagni, eds. Labour’s Reward: Real Wages and Eco-
                         nomic Change in 19th- and 20th-Century Europe. Cheltenham, UK: Edward
                         Elgar, 1995.
                     Seassaro, Cesare. “The Teachings of the Struggle of the Engineers” [Gli insegna-
                         menti della lotta dei metallurgici]. L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 16 (October 2, 1920):
                         133–34.
                     Sefton, James, and Martin Weale. Reconciliation of National Income and Expendi-
                         ture: Balanced Estimates of National Income for the United Kingdom, 1920–1990.



                                                                                                     433




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   433        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                         Studies in the National Income and Expenditure of the United Kingdom 7.
                         Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
                     Segreto, Luciano. “Armi e munizioni. Lo sforzo bellico tra speculazione e pro-
                         gresso tecnico.” Italia contemporanea 146 (1982): 35–66.
                     Sember, Florencia. “El papel de Raúl Prebisch en la creación del Banco Central de
                         la República Argentina.” Estudios críticos del desarrollo 2, no. 3 (2012): 133–57.
                         https://estudiosdeldesarrollo.mx/estudioscriticosdeldesarrollo/wp-content/
                         uploads/2019/01/ECD3-6.pdf.
                     Semmler, Willi. “The Macroeconomics of Austerity in the European Union.” So-
                         cial Research 80, no. 3 (2013): 883–914. https://www.jstor.org/stable/24385696.
                     Semmler, Willi, and Alexander Haider. “The Perils of Debt Deflation in the
                         Euro Area: A Multi-Regime Model.” Empirica 43, no. 2 (May 1, 2016): 257–78.
                         https://doi.org/10.1007/s10663-016-9327-5.
                     Serpieri, Arrigo. La guerra e le classi rurali Italiane. New Haven, CT: Yale Univer-
                         sity Press, 1930.
                     Serri, Niccolò. “Review of Senza lavoro. La disoccupazione in Italia dall’unità
                         ad oggi, by Manfredi Alberti.” Modern Italy 22, no. 3 (August 2017): 339–40.
                         https://doi.org/10.1017/mit.2017.11.
                     Seymour, Richard. “A Short History of Privatisation in the UK: 1979–2012.” The
                         Guardian, March 29, 2012. https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/
                         mar/29/short-history-of-privatisation.
                     Shaikh, Anwar. Capitalism: Competition, Conflict, Crises. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
                         sity Press, 2016.
                     Shefner, Jon, and Cory Blad. Why Austerity Persists. First edition. Cambridge:
                         Polity Press, 2019.
                     Siciliano, Giovanni. Cento anni di borsa in Italia: Mercato, imprese e rendimenti
                         azionari nel ventesimo secolo. Bologna: Il Mulino, 2001.
                     Siepmann, H. A. “The International Financial Conference at Brussels.” Economic
                         Journal 30, no. 120 (1920): 436–59.
                     Skidelsky, Robert. “Keynes and the Treasury View: The Case for and against an
                         Active Unemployment Policy, 1920–1929.” In The Emergence of the Welfare
                         State in Britain and Germany, 1850–1950, ed. Wolfgang Mommsen. London:
                         Routledge, 1981.
                     ———. John Maynard Keynes: Economist, Philosopher, Statesman. Abridged edi-
                         tion. London: Macmillan, 2003.
                     ———. Keynes: The Return of the Master. First edition. New York: PublicAffairs,
                         2009.
                     Slobodian, Quinn. Globalists: The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism.
                         Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2018.
                     Spriano, Paolo. Torino operaia nella grande guerra (1914–1918). Turin: G. Einaudi,
                         1960.
                     ———. L’Ordine nuovo e i consigli di fabbrica. Turin: Einaudi, 1971.
                     ———. The Occupation of the Factories: Italy 1920. London: Pluto Press, 1975.



                     434




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   434        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.            6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     Stein, Ben. “In Class Warfare, Guess Which Class Is Winning?” New York Times,
                         November 26, 2006.
                     Storm, Servaas. “Lost in Deflation: Why Italy’s Woes Are a Warning to the Whole
                         Eurozone.” International Journal of Political Economy 48, no. 3 (July 2019): 195–
                         237. https://doi.org/10.1080/08911916.2019.1655943.
                     Summers, Lawrence H. “Inflation Caused by Fed Dismissing Concerns as Tran-
                         sient.” Interview with Bloomberg Wall Street Week, March 5, 2021. https://www
                         .youtube.com/watch?v=dni9TbqIwqo.
                     Sylos Labini, Paolo. Saggio sulle classi sociali. Bari: Laterza, 1975.
                     Tabellini, Guido, and Alberto Alesina. “Voting on the Budget Deficit.” American
                         Economic Review 80, no. 1 (1990): 37–49. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2006732.
                     Tasca, Angelo. “An Episode of Working-Class Struggle at the Eve of Revolution:
                         The Invasion of the Lands of Medicina” [Un episodio della lotta di classe alla
                         vigilia della rivoluzione]. L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 9 (July 10, 1920): 69–70.
                     ———. Nascita e avvento del fascismo. Bari: Laterza, 1965.
                     Tawney, R. H. “The Abolition of Economic Controls, 1918–1921.” Economic History
                         Review 13, no. 1/2 (1943): 1–30. https://doi.org/10.2307/2590512. JSTOR.
                     Taylor, Lance. “Not So Modern Monetary Theory.” Institute for New Economic
                         Thinking, October 31, 2019. https://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/blog/
                         not-so-modern-monetary-theory.
                     Taylor, Lance, with Özlem Ömer. Macroeconomic Inequality from Reagan to
                         Trump: Market Power, Wage Repression, Asset Price Inflation, and Industrial
                         Decline. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020.
                     Terry, George Percy Warner. The Representation of the People Act 1918. London:
                         C. Knight & Co., 1918.
                     Terzi, Alessio. “The Great Fiscal Lever: An Italian Economic Obsession.” Bruegel
                         (blog post), August 21, 2018. https://www.bruegel.org/2018/08/the-great-fiscal
                         -lever-an-italian-economic-obsession/.
                     Thane, Pat. Foundations of the Welfare State. Second edition. Longman Social
                         Policy in Britain Series. New York and London: Addison-Wesley Longman,
                         1996.
                     Thomas, Peter D. The Gramscian Moment: Philosophy, Hegemony and Marxism.
                         Leiden: Brill, 2009.
                     Thomas, R., and N. Dimsdale. “A Millennium of UK Data”: Bank of England
                         OBRA Dataset. Bank of England, 2017. https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/
                         statistics/research-datasets.
                     Titmuss, Richard. “Essays on the Welfare State.” University Press Scholarship
                         Online, 2018.
                     Titmuss, Richard Morris. Essays on “The Welfare State.” London: Allen & Unwin,
                         (1958) 2018.
                     Tittoni, Tommaso. Nuovi scritti di politica interna ed estera. Milan: Treves, 1930.
                     Togliatti, Palmiro. “Labor’s State” [Lo stato del lavoro]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 10
                         (July 19, 1919a): 71–72.



                                                                                                      435




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   435        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     bibliography


                     ———. “The Battle of Ideas” [La battaglia delle idee]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 24
                        (November 1, 1919b): 190.
                     ———. “The Assembly of the Turin Metallurgical Department” [L’assemblea della
                        sezione metallurgica Torinese]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 25 (November 8, 1919c):
                        195–96.
                     ———. “Class Control” [Controllo di classe]. L’Ordine nuovo 1, no. 32 (January 3,
                        1920): 249–50.
                     Tomassini, Luigi. “Industrial Mobilization and the Labour Market in Italy during
                        the First World War.” Social History 16, no. 1 (1991): 59–87. https://doi.org/10
                        .1080/03071029108567789.
                     Tomlinson, Jim. Problems of British Economic Policy, 1870–1945. London: Rout-
                        ledge, 1981. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315019666.
                     Toniolo, Gianni. L’economia dell’Italia fascista. Bari: Laterza, 1980.
                     ———. “Italian Banking, 1919–1936.” In Banking, Currency, and Finance in Europe
                        between the Wars. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995. https://doi.org/10
                        .1093/0198288034.003.0011.
                     ———, ed. The Oxford Handbook of the Italian Economy since Unification. Oxford:
                        Oxford University Press, 2013.
                     Tooze, J. Adam. The Deluge: The Great War, America and the Remaking of the
                        Global Order, 1916–1931. New York: Viking Adult, 2014.
                     ———. “Neoliberalism’s World Order.” Dissent Magazine (Summer 2018). https://
                        www.dissentmagazine.org/article/neoliberalism-world-order-review-quinn
                        -slobodian-globalists.
                     Trentin, Bruno. Autunno caldo: Il secondo biennio rosso 1968–1969. Rome: Editori
                        Riuniti, 1999.
                     Ufficio Municipale del Lavoro. Bollettino mensile, vol. 3. Rome (Italy), 1920.
                        https://catalog.hathitrust.org/Record/012392095.
                     US Department of Labor. “Industrial Unrest in Great Britain: Reports of the
                        Commission of Inquiry into Industrial Unrest.” Bulletin of the United States
                        Bureau of Labor Statistics 237 (October 1917): 7–227.
                     Vecchi, Giovanni. Measuring Wellbeing: A History of Italian Living Standards.
                        Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017.
                     Vergara, Camila. “The Meaning of Chile’s Explosion.” Jacobin Magazine, October
                        29, 2019.
                     ———. “Burying Pinochet.” Sidecar, 2021. https://newleftreview.org/sidecar/posts/
                        burying-pinochet.
                     Viglongo, Andrea. “The Experiment of Cooperative Management of the Caste-
                        naso Workers” [L’esperimento di gestione cooperativa degli operai di caste-
                        naso]. L’Ordine nuovo 2, no. 10 (July 17, 1920): 75–76.
                     Vivarelli, Roberto. Il dopoguerra in Italia e l’avvento del fascismo (1918–1922).
                        Naples: Istituto Italiano per Gli Studi Storici, 1967.
                     Walsh, Tom. What Is the Shop Steward Movement? A Survey with Diagrams. Lon-
                        don: The Agenda Press, 1920.



                     436




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   436        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                          bibliography


                     Wartzman, Rick. “’We Were Shocked’: RAND Study Uncovers Massive In-
                        come Shift to the Top 1.” Fast Company, September 14, 2020. https://www
                        .fastcompany.com/90550015/we-were-shocked-rand-study-uncovers-massive
                        -income-shift-to-the-top-1.
                     Whetham, William Cecil Dampier. The War and the Nation: A Study in Construc-
                        tive Politics. London: John Murray, 1917.
                     Whiteside, Noelle. “Welfare Legislation and the Unions during the First World
                        War.” Historical Journal 23, no. 4 (1980): 857–74. https://www.jstor.org/stable/
                        2638729. JSTOR.
                     Whiting, R. C. “Taxation and the Working Class, 1915–24.” Historical Journal 33,
                        no. 4 (1990): 895–916. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2639803.
                     Wolfe, Humbert. Labour Supply and Regulation. New York: H. Milford, 1923.
                     Wood, Ellen Miskin. The Origin of Capitalism. New York: Monthly Review Press,
                        1999.
                     Wrigley, Chris. A History of British Industrial Relations 1914–1939. Brighton, Sus-
                        sex, UK: Harvester Press, 1987.
                     ———. Lloyd George and the Challenge of Labour: The Post-War Coalition, 1918–
                        1922. Hemel Hempstead, UK: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1991.
                     Zaganella, Mario. “La mobilitazione industriale: Un pilastro nella evoluzione del
                        modello Italiano di intervento pubblico in economia.” In Istituzioni e società
                        in Francia e in Italia nella prima guerra mondiale. Rome: Edizioni Nuova
                        Cultura, 2017. https://www.pucrs.br/humanidades/wp-content/uploads/sites/
                        30/2016/03/La-mobilitazione-industriale.pdf.
                     Zamagni, Vera. “La dinamica dei salari nel settore industriale, 1921–1939.” Qua-
                        derni storici 10, nos. 29/30 (2/3) (1975): 530–49.
                     ———. Dalla periferia al centro: La seconda rinascita economica dell’Italia, 1861–
                        1981. Bologna: Il Mulino, 1990.
                     ———. “Industrial Wages and Workers’ Protest in Italy during the ‘Biennio Rosso’
                        (1919–1920).” Journal of European Economic History 20, no. 1 (Spring 1991):
                        137–153.
                     Zevin, Alexander. Liberalism at Large: The World According to the Economist.
                        London: Verso, 2019.
                     Zini, Zino. “From Citizen to Producer” [Da cittadino a produttore]. L’Ordine
                        nuovo 1, no. 38 (February 21, 1920): 301–2.
                     Zucaro, Domenico. La rivolta di Torino del 1917 nella sentenza del tribunale mili-
                        tare territoriale. Milan: Rivista Storica del Socialismo, 1960.
                     Zucman, Gabriel. “Global Wealth Inequality.” Annual Review of Economics 11,
                        no. 1 (August 2019): 109–38. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-economics
                        -080218-025852.




                                                                                                     437




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   437        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   438        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     Index




                     Abbiate, Mario, 336n45                           anti-democracy, 7, 15, 143, 164, 202, 298–99,
                     Abbiate Commission, 68                               376n34, 382n75, 392n31
                     abstinence, 142, 178–80, 187, 217–18, 221,       anti-Semitism, 223, 373n13, 376n33
                         244, 270, 284, 401n29                        apolitical technocrats, Britain’s reliance on,
                     Accademia dei Lincei, 207                            16–17
                     Addison, Christopher, 57–58, 185, 331n11,        apolitical theory, 10–12, 16–17, 148, 163–64,
                         333nn24–25, 365nn52–53                           244, 295–98
                     Adult Education Committee (Britain),             arbitration, and labor disputes, 39, 43–44,
                         65–66                                            236, 322n4, 326n39, 327nn40–41, 347n13,
                     Advisory Committee of Finance and Com-               403n9
                         merce of the Trades Union Congress,          Ardagna, Silvia, 295, 297, 405nn24–25
                         169–71                                       Arendt, Hannah, 303
                     aeronautic industry, 329n56                      Argentina, 167, 202, 288, 299, 402n2
                     Agnelli, Giovanni, 117, 119, 122                 Arias, Gino, 383n75, 387n100
                     agrarian mobilization, in Italy, 33              arms sector, 31
                     agricultural industry, 29, 32, 33, 49, 66, 69,   Arnot, Robert, 86, 88, 342nn30–31, 343n35
                         79, 82, 94–95, 117, 124, 129, 241, 280,      Astor, Waldorf, 67, 335nn34–35
                         323n15, 327n49, 329n59, 339n7, 339n13,       austere Fascism. See fascism; Fascism
                         381n68, 391n24, 399nn13–14, 407n37               (party)
                     Albertini, Luigi, 122, 346n5                     austerity, 2–7, 126–27, 159, 203, 222–23, 246–
                     alcohol expenditures/duties, 220, 364n45,            47, 265, 269, 271–72, 285, 288–89, 304–5,
                         403n10                                           307, 311; and authoritarianism, 255–58,
                     Alesina, Alberto, 211, 232, 295–98, 300,             376n34; British challenges from within,
                         354n15, 374n20, 404–6nn22–29                     167–69; capacity to divert attention from
                     Allende, Salvador, 301                               systemic problems, 12; and capitalist
                     Amendola, Giovanni, 122, 392n30                      crisis, 139; and conferences (see Brus-
                     Anderson, W. C., 104                                 sels Conference; Genoa Conference);
                     Anglo-American financiers, 14, 263, 269–70           core principles of, 163–64; and crisis
                     Ansaldo, 48, 119                                     of capitalism, 158; and democracy, 164;
                     Ansaldo/Bank of Rome, 230                            and economic theory, 171–74; effect on
                     anti-capitalism, 5, 44, 105, 223, 376n33             aggregate demand, 401n29; effects on




                                                                                                               439




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   439        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                     6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     index

                     austerity (continued)                                   171–74, 176–80, 182–84, 188–90, 193, 198–
                         workers, 18; impact on class relations,             99, 201–2, 204, 221, 251, 267, 299, 357n1,
                         271–72, 275; impact on society, 289;                358n10, 359nn18–19, 363n44, 366n64,
                         and liberal democracies, 7–8; modern,               367n65, 367n67, 368n73
                         159–60; nature and purpose of, 140–44;          Black Friday, 91
                         objective of, 130; operation of, 278–86;        Blue Book, 29, 322n4
                         and Ordinovista (see Ordinovista move-          Blyth, Mark, 3, 16, 319n7
                         ment); as policy mistake, 17; as a politi-      Board of Education (Britain), 185, 364n49
                         cal project, 163; and political repression,     “Bocconi boys,” 211, 295–96
                         269, 299; and strong state, 249, 253–63;        Bologna, 71, 214, 315, 338n6, 371n7
                         and technocracy, 17, 130–31, 160; then          Bolshevism, 94, 142, 158, 220, 223, 225, 246–
                         and now, 7–10; trinity, 9, 58, 73, 127,             47, 261, 338n3, 375n29, 376n32, 379n58,
                         241, 290; after World War I, in Britain,            389n7, 391n24
                         10. See also fiscal austerity; industrial       Borghi, Pietro, 352n63
                         austerity; monetary austerity                   Boyce, Robert, 358n11
                     authoritarianism, 31, 206, 221, 255–58, 267,        Bradbury, John, 201, 357n1, 359n18,
                         300–301, 376n34                                     363nn43–44, 369n80, 370n81
                     automobile sector, 48–49, 119, 329n57               Brand, R. H., 134, 139, 141, 148, 149, 150,
                     auxiliary factories, 32, 33, 37, 40, 44, 325n32         354n8, 355n16, 357n29, 357n32
                     Avarelli, Diego, 55                                 Brevetti-Fiat, 106
                                                                         breweries, 31
                     Bachi, Riccardo, 30, 34, 124, 323n17, 329n58        Britain–Italy relationship, British loans to
                     bailouts, 1–2, 230, 311                                 Italy, 250–52, 387n1
                     Baines, Frank, 64                                   British Treasury, 13, 16, 19–20, 47, 58, 72,
                     bakers, and strikes, 78                                 90, 92, 156, 162, 164–69, 171–73, 180,
                     Baldwin, Stanley, 189–90                                181, 184–85, 187–91, 193–94, 197, 201,
                     Banca Commerciale, 120                                  203, 208, 238, 250–52, 286, 299, 344n36,
                     Banca del Lavoro e della Cooperazione, 94               358n7, 359n18, 364–65n52, 365n56,
                     Bank of England, 16, 19, 92, 150, 153, 161,             365n58
                          165–66, 173, 194, 197, 201–4, 256, 261, 262,   Brosio, Giorgio, 379n50
                          264, 268, 273, 355n22, 360n24, 369n80,         Bruins, Gijsbert Weijer Jan, 138, 142
                          386n94, 387n99, 393n40, 395nn48–49,            Brussels Commission on Currency and
                          395n51, 396nn59–60                                 Exchange, 153–54
                     Bank of Italy/Banca d’Italia, 19, 265–68            Brussels Conference, 13–15, 127, 131, 133, 135–
                     banks: bank rates, 194, 196, 367n68, 368n75,            38, 140, 143–46, 148, 151, 158–59, 222, 295,
                          369n80; as independent technocratic                298–99, 354n14, 356n23; Resolution II,
                          bodies, 151–52. See also Bank of England;          143–44; Resolution III, 144, 151; Resolu-
                          Bank of Italy/Banca d’Italia                       tion IV, 144, 152; Resolution V, 145, 147,
                     bargaining power, of workers/labor, 2, 9, 16,           154–55; Resolution VI, 146; Resolution
                          41–42, 52, 129, 150, 190, 191, 294                 VII, 142–43, 150, 153; Resolution IX, 142–
                     Barnes, George, 329n61                                  43; Resolution X, 159
                     Barone, Enrico, 372n13                              budget: balanced, 9, 29, 166–67, 203, 259,
                     Bavaria, 6                                              264, 290, 300, 322n5, 356n27, 363n41,
                     Bedaux system, 237, 382n74                              370n3; cuts, 2, 9, 16, 128–29, 149, 174,
                     Beneduce, Alberto, 147                                  184–85; deficits, 145, 149, 159; equilib-
                     Berlusconi, Silvio, 293, 294                            rium, 146, 256, 269
                     Bevin, Ernest, 65                                   Buffet, Warren, 19
                     Bill of Full Powers, 225, 390n22                    Buffetti, Ferdinando, 93, 344n41, 344n43
                     Bill of the Miners’ Federation, 89                  building guilds, 26, 83, 92, 95–99, 333n25
                     Bissolati, Leonida, 61, 332n17                      Buozzi, Bruno, 37, 39, 42, 122, 346n5, 384n79
                     Black, Robert, 171, 360n25                          bureaucrats, 20, 24, 28, 29, 44–47, 55, 58, 156,
                     Blackett, Sir Basil P., 10, 20, 139, 162, 165–67,       249, 250



                     440




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   440        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                          6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                                                    index

                     canteens, 326n33                                      Cherubini, Arnaldo, 331n15, 335n36, 335n41,
                     Capel-Cure, Sir Edward Henry, 251–53,                     335n43
                         389n8                                             “Chicago Boys,” 301
                     capital, 21–22, 130; accumulation, 5, 8, 12–14,       Chile, 1, 301, 406n30
                         21, 30, 35, 42–43, 49, 51, 53–54, 57, 58, 76,     Chiozza Money, Leo George, 28–29, 31,
                         93, 99–100, 114, 127, 128, 132, 134, 136, 141,        45–46, 85, 156, 322n4, 324n19, 327n43,
                         144–46, 149, 152–54, 158, 163, 177–78, 182,           342n31
                         183, 187, 189, 196–98, 205, 213, 221, 225,        Churchill, Winston, 46, 166, 172–73, 201–2,
                         230, 244, 247, 254, 258, 269–71, 273, 285,            264–65, 327n45, 340n20, 360n25,
                         286, 287, 299, 308, 310, 355n17, 394n41,              365nn58–59, 393n38, 395n50
                         398n6, 401n28, 405n23, 405n25; duties,            Ciampi, Carlo Azeglio, 292–93
                         291; and labor, 234, 282; rehabilitation,         Ciocca, Pierluigi, 30, 311, 370n3, 371n7
                         and lower wages, 191                              Ciuffelli, Augusto, 69
                     capitalism, 3–7, 9–10, 12–13, 14, 15, 21–28,          Clarke, Simon, 81, 320n18, 333n24, 359n18
                         33, 35, 66, 82, 91, 96, 99–102, 108–11, 125,      class(es), 4, 10, 12, 163, 176, 179; capitalist,
                         131–34, 217, 287, 289, 309; alternatives              12, 16, 17, 23, 102, 131, 152, 183, 249, 273,
                         to, 301, 305, 307; and austerity, 3–4, 271;           278, 305, 345n4, 369n78; conflict, 12–13,
                         class relations between owners and                    19, 20, 308; differences, 177; division,
                         workers, 23; coercion under, 22–23;                   342n29; middle classes, 76, 166, 272,
                         crisis of, 3, 25, 53–54, 74, 116, 127, 158,           304, 338n3, 363n40, 377n38; repression,
                         249; and exploitation (see exploitation);             308; shares, 272; struggle, 147; tensions,
                         free-market, 45, 51, 85, 361n31; laissez-             in postwar Britain, 78; upper, 8; work-
                         faire, 42, 54, 57, 72, 73, 156, 167, 321n2;           ing classes, 4, 8, 9, 11–12, 15–17, 20, 25,
                         monetary economy, 32–33; private prop-                35, 36, 40, 47, 49–50, 59, 61–63, 65, 67,
                         erty, 35; and pure economics (see pure                69–70, 76, 77, 79, 83, 92, 96, 99, 100,
                         economics); structural flaws, 86; vertical            106, 110, 112, 116, 118, 127, 129, 130, 133,
                         relationship of powers, 136                           158, 182, 219, 225, 231, 263, 299, 329n58,
                     capitalist civilization, 252, 320n17                      341n22
                     capital order, 4, 5, 7, 13, 25, 157, 228, 237, 262,   classless society, 100, 139, 243, 345n2
                         272, 287, 289, 290, 296, 297, 300–303,            Clinton, Bill, 302
                         307–8                                             Clydeside region, 99, 104, 105, 339n12
                     Caporetto, Battle of, 59, 338n6                       Clyde Workers Committee, 50
                     CARES Act (US), 303                                   Clynes, John R., 343n33
                     Cassa Nationale Infortuni (CNI), 69                   coal, 72, 323n11, 342n31; miners (see miners)
                     Cassel, Gustav, 136, 138–39, 353n4                    coercion strategy, 8, 22, 38, 114, 127, 143, 147–
                     Castenaso co-op, 92–93, 94                                48, 151, 163, 197, 237, 245, 278, 286, 311
                     central banks, 8, 15, 141, 151, 201–2, 265–66,        Cohen, Jon S., 383n78, 384n82, 387n99,
                         360n24, 405n28; freedom of, 151–52, 165,              400n21
                         199–200, 266–68, 300                              Cokayne, Brien (Baron Cullen of Ash-
                     Central Labour College, 186                               bourne), 150–51
                     Cermenati, Mario, 68, 335n38                          Cole, G. D. H., 29, 41, 49, 74–76, 80–81, 82,
                     Chalmers, Lord Robert, 134–35, 140–41, 144,               88, 90–91, 95, 97, 98, 289, 326n37, 337n1,
                         146, 355n16                                           337n3, 367n66
                     Chamberlain, Austen, 162, 176, 179–81, 193,           colonies, austerity in, 7, 186, 320n12
                         201, 365n52, 381n69, 394n44                       Commission on Currency and Exchange,
                     Chamberlain, Neville, 180–81, 193, 201,                   143, 150–54
                         368n71, 388n5, 391n25                             Commission on Finance, 144
                     Chamber of Commerce, 67, 69, 90, 169                  Commission on Public Finance, 140, 142–
                     Chamber of Labour of Bologna and Turin,                   44, 146, 159
                         71                                                Committee of Enquiry (1920), 326n35
                     Chambers of Labour, 332n19                            Committee of National Expenditure (Ged-
                     chemical industry, 119, 329n56                            des Committee), 184



                                                                                                                        441




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   441        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                             6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     index

                     Committee on Currency and Foreign Ex-                Cuomo, Andrew, 1
                         change (Cunliffe Committee), 161                 currency, 23, 128, 129, 138, 148–54, 164, 166,
                     Committee on National Debt and Taxation,                191, 193, 195, 231, 238, 240, 241, 247, 255,
                         183                                                 267, 268, 293, 322n7, 356n24, 361n29;
                     Committee on Production, 43, 326n39                     Euro, 293; reform, and financial strain,
                     communal living, 65, 73                                 363n41. See also lira
                     communal property, 75                                Currency and Credit (Hawtrey), 164, 172,
                     competitive individualism, 57                           174, 176–77, 184
                     compulsory thrift, 181, 226, 363n44
                     Confederation of Fascist Corporations, 235           Daily Herald, The, 20, 47–48, 60, 78–79, 90,
                     Confederazione Generale dell’Agricoltura,                328nn50–51, 340n20
                         La, 124                                          Daily News, 86
                     Confindustria, 116, 121, 124, 351n43, 387n97,        Dallolio, General, 36
                         403n8                                            D’Annunzio, Gabriele, 209
                     consensus strategy, 8, 11, 17, 49, 58, 127, 130–     D’Aragona, Ludovico, 338n7
                         31, 135, 137, 142–43, 147, 160, 163, 171, 210,   Davis, Joseph S., 136, 138–40, 354n7
                         245, 295, 302, 353n3                             Davison, M. J., 62–63, 333n24
                     “consume less” axiom, 127, 141, 153, 161, 179,       dear money policies, 128–29, 150–51, 155,
                         202, 213, 243–44, 248, 270, 283                      168, 174, 193–98, 203, 240, 369n76
                     consumer outlay, 172, 362n39                         debt, 2, 3, 9, 25, 58, 77, 128, 135, 144, 145, 165,
                     consumers, 163, 174–77, 184, 194, 343n33,                167, 174, 182–83, 186, 201, 229–30, 247,
                         359n22, 361n30, 362n34                               249–51, 270, 293, 353n3, 395n46, 396n55;
                     consumption duties, 291                                  conversion, 358n10; restrictive debt
                     cooperatives, 34, 60, 64, 70, 76, 77, 83,                management policy, 384n82; service,
                         92–96, 99, 101, 122, 125, 157, 268, 338n7,           182; settlements/repayment, 263–66,
                         344n41                                               377n37. See also credits
                     Cooperative Wholesale Society, 345n46                deflation, 2, 16, 128, 129, 137, 150–53, 158, 162,
                     corporate profit shares, 301                             169–70, 182, 190, 193, 195–97, 199–201,
                     corporation tax, 183, 291                                203, 242, 243, 263, 266, 272, 277, 281–83,
                     corporativism, 236, 237, 381nn69–70, 383n75,             311, 355n21, 356n28, 366n64
                         387n100                                          Delacroix, Leon, 145, 146
                     Corradini, Enrico, 121                               Del Vecchio, Gustavo, 371n7, 382n75
                     corriere della sera, Il, 20, 118, 122, 124, 211,     democracy, 14, 15, 143, 302; and austerity,
                         217, 221, 223, 224, 231, 294, 372n8, 374n21,         164; economic, 7, 50, 74–99, 100, 126,
                         375n25, 376n31                                       136, 196, 272, 341n24; political, 298,
                     Costamagna, Carlo, 383n75                                341n22
                     Cottafavi, Vittorio, 61, 332n21                      Democratic Party (PD), Italy, 294–95
                     cotton industry, 386n95                              De Nava, Giuseppe, 250
                     counter-reforms, 229                                 depoliticization of economic matters, 130,
                     counterrevolution, 123–25                                151, 157, 164, 187–90, 197, 200–205, 243–
                     COVID-19 pandemic, and austerity pattern,                44, 295
                         1, 285, 303–4, 397n68                            De Stefani, Alberto, 10, 32, 40, 41, 44, 48,
                     Cox, Garfield V., 95, 96                                 206–9, 212, 213, 215, 217, 221–22, 224,
                     credits, 23, 30, 91, 94, 149–50, 153, 163, 174–          225, 226–29, 231–32, 236–37, 239–41,
                         76, 179, 180, 182, 184, 193–94, 198, 200,            244, 253–55, 259, 264, 290, 294, 299,
                         202, 203, 227, 243, 247–49, 266, 268,                323nn15–18, 329n56, 335n40, 371nn7–8,
                         322n7, 360n24, 361nn29–30, 397n60. See               372n10, 374n22, 376n34, 376n36, 377n39,
                         also debt                                            377n42, 378n44, 378n49, 380n60,
                     Cronin, James, 103, 191, 196                             384n85, 385n89, 385n91, 390n16,
                     crowding-out argument, 156–57, 189–90, 231,              390n18
                         365n59, 366n61                                   Deutscher, Patrick, 359n18, 360n25, 363n39
                     cultural empowerment, 66                             devaluation, 11, 137, 250, 270, 277, 322n7



                     442




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   442        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                              6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                                                  index

                     Dini, Lamberto, 292–93                             Elliott, Dorinda, 406n33
                     disciplining/directing labor, 37–39, 157–58,       emancipatory form of knowledge, 125–26;
                         234                                                against the naturalization of the capital-
                     Draghi, Mario, 211, 292–93                             ist order, 108–10; against the political
                     Duckham, Sir Arthur, 341nn25–26                        and economic divide, 113–16; praxis,
                     Dyson, Kenneth, 404n16                                 111–13; workers’ agency, 110–11
                                                                        Emergency Powers Act (Britain), 191–92
                     economic coercions. See coercion strategy          Emmott, Mary Gertrude, 64
                     economic collectivism, 162                         employment deregulation, 2
                     economic crisis of Italy, understanding of,        employment exchanges, 41, 326n35, 326n40,
                         252                                                336n45
                     economic democracy, 7, 50, 74–99, 100, 126,        enfranchisement of men and women, 76,
                         136, 196, 272, 341n24                              337n2
                     economic domination, 12–13                         Engels, Friedrich, 348n28
                     economic freedom, 15, 210, 270, 299                entrepreneur, 15, 24, 30, 131, 145, 218–19, 231,
                     economic ideas and practical knowledge,                234, 247, 296, 308, 361n31
                         216, 303, 359n18                               Europe, 6, 8, 288; integration process,
                     economic interventions, in Britain, 49–50,             404n16; markets and states relationship,
                         99, 102, 148                                       across, 28
                     economic necessities, 108                          European Central Bank (ECB), 300
                     economic recovery, requirement of, 137, 141–       European Monetary System (EMS), 292
                         42, 178, 242, 260, 271, 362n37                 European Union, 1, 292, 300, 406n28
                     economic theory, 11–13, 130, 163–64, 213,          Excess Profits Duty (EPD), 183, 323n10
                         216, 234, 243, 287, 288, 308, 312, 359n18,     exchange rates, 129, 167, 195, 197, 239, 240,
                         374n22; as apolitical, 164; and austerity          250, 322n7, 369n80, 384n84
                         policies, 171–74                               exploitation, 17–18, 26, 40, 41, 43, 44, 47, 49,
                     economic virtue, 13, 217–18                            59, 106, 131, 155, 235, 237, 273, 275–76, 301,
                     Economist, 20, 136–37, 139, 142, 196, 211, 223,        308, 398n2
                         225, 229, 236–37, 240, 255, 259, 260, 262,     exports, 28, 46, 91, 128–29, 176, 179, 190,
                         302, 327n48, 353n4, 372n8, 374nn18–19,             195, 198, 239, 241, 248–50, 265, 270, 277,
                         377n36, 381n68, 383n76, 384n84,                    323n11, 324n18, 343n35, 355n21, 356n26,
                         385n85, 385n87, 386n96, 389n11, 390n16,            369nn79–80, 386n92, 388n1
                         391nn23–24, 391n26, 394n43                     expropriations, 31, 76, 310
                     education, 9, 38, 62, 65–66, 73, 112, 146, 283;
                         adult education, 65–66, 334n30; and            Facta, Luigi, 353n2
                         fiscal austerity, 185–86; public education,    factory committees, 39, 51, 100, 102–6, 113,
                         2, 334n29                                           125, 235, 325n28, 347n13, 402n5
                     Education Acts of 1906–1907 (Britain),             factory councils, 100, 111–12, 114, 119, 345n2,
                         330n6                                               347n13, 348n29; inclusive organization
                     effective demand, 175, 307–8, 361nn30–31                of, 111; praxis, 112–13
                     Eichengreen, Barry, 135–36, 310, 322n6             factory occupation, 26, 51, 102, 116–22, 125,
                     Einaudi, Luigi, 5, 30, 37, 155, 206, 207,               147, 235, 251n46, 402n5
                         210–13, 217, 220–21, 223–29, 231, 236–37,      Falk, Oswald Toynbee, 173
                         239–40, 247, 255, 262, 295, 298–99,            falling prices, 186, 355n21, 367n65, 368n73,
                         320n10, 322n7, 325n26, 346n5, 352n57,               368n75
                         370n3, 371n7, 372n8, 374n19, 374nn21–22,       family allowances, 331n16
                         375n25, 375nn29–31, 377n36, 380n58,            Family Endowment Committee, 64–65
                         381nn67–68, 383n76, 384n64, 385n85,            fascism, 13–17
                         386n96, 388n2, 390n15, 394n43                  Fascism (party), 125–26, 132, 206–7, 223–24,
                     elections, 46, 63, 76–77, 113, 162, 226, 234–35,        248, 256–57, 269, 273, 276, 284, 299, 311–
                         259, 292, 294, 338nn5–6, 344nn43–44,                12, 382n75, 387n100, 400n23
                         350n38                                         “Fascist Financial Policy,” 378n46



                                                                                                                     443




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   443        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     index

                     fascistissime laws, 206, 373n18                         Resolution VI, 153; Resolution VII,
                     Fascist Manifesto of 1919, 226–27                       356n27; Resolution XI, 152
                     Favero, Carlo, 295, 386n97, 400n22, 405n24          Gentile, Giovanni, 209
                     Featherstone, Kevin, 404n16                         Giavazzi, Francesco, 211, 295, 405n22
                     Federico, Giovanni, 400n18                          Gide, Charles, 138
                     FEDERTERRA, 77                                      Gilbert, James, 63–64
                     Fiat, 48, 105, 106, 113, 122, 242, 328n56,          Giolitti, Giovanni, 69, 120–21, 124, 226, 262,
                         347n14, 350n38, 402n5                               377n39
                     financial code, 133–34, 172                         giornale degli economisti, Il, 213, 370n4,
                     financial orthodoxy, 23, 259                            373n14, 374n22
                     FIOM (Federazione Impiegati e Operai                Gleason, Arthur H., 86, 346n9
                         Metallurgici), 42, 50, 77, 116–18, 120–22       gold, 23, 356n28
                     fiscal austerity, 8–9, 58, 127, 130, 137, 144–50,   gold standard, 7, 8, 23–24, 30, 58, 152, 168,
                         152–53, 180, 225–26, 264, 290–95; attack            196–98, 243, 263, 270, 293, 310, 356n27,
                         on social expenditures, 184–87; and in-             360n24, 369nn77–78, 369n80, 387n98,
                         dustrial austerity, 129, 162, 293, 297; and         395n51, 396n52
                         monetary austerity, 128; social policy,         Goschen, Sir Henry, 392n26
                         228–31; and taxation, 180–84, 226–28.           Gossen, Hermann Heinrich, 208
                         See also public expenditure, reduction          government expenditures, cuts to, 56, 278,
                         in; regressive taxation                             322n5
                     Fisher, Irving, 359n18                              Graham, Sir Ronald William, 233, 242–43,
                     floating debt, 144, 167, 201, 240, 355n22,              252–54, 255–58, 265, 280–81, 380n62,
                         384n82, 396n53, 396n55, 397n64                      390n22, 391n25, 392n29, 394n42, 394n44,
                     Flora, Federico, 380n61                                 396n53, 396n56
                     Foley, Duncan, 315, 401n27                          Gramsci, Antonio, 5, 100, 105, 106, 107–10,
                     food distribution, in Britain and Italy, 34             112, 114, 116, 118, 123–25, 234, 330n63,
                     foreign dependence, of Italy, 249–53,                   345n2, 346n5, 346n10, 346n12, 347n13,
                         377n37                                              347n15, 348n21, 348nn24–26, 349n35,
                     free market, 35, 45, 51, 85, 147–48, 235, 299,          351nn41–42, 351n45, 352n62
                         361n31, 373n16                                  Grand Fascista Council, 258
                     Friedman, Milton, 301                               Great Depression, 190, 285, 288, 311, 399n10,
                     frugality, 159, 221                                     400n16, 401n29
                                                                         Greece, sovereign debt crisis, 1–2
                     Gabbuti, Giacomo, 228, 274, 277, 285, 312,          grey bread, 241
                        316–17, 378n49, 398n7, 400n23, 401n24,           guilds, 6, 24, 64, 76, 83, 92, 95–99, 101,
                        401n26, 404n17                                       134, 185, 279, 333nn25–26, 341n24,
                     Gairloch Scheme, 188                                    344–45nn44–46
                     Gallacher, Willi, 5, 48, 103, 319n9, 349n33,
                        350n37                                           Haldane, Richard, 56, 156, 331n8, 334n29,
                     Geddes, Eric, 58                                       357n24
                     Geddes Axe, 98, 184, 188, 283, 390n16               Hall, Alfred D., 55
                     Geddes Committee, 184–86, 365n56                    Hambling, Sir Herbert, 252, 388n7
                     General Confederation of Labour (CGdL),             Hammond, J. H., 53, 57, 331n10
                        60–61, 68, 70–71, 77, 81, 94, 121, 235,          Hamon, A., 106, 347n17
                        335n36, 336n50, 338n7                            “hands off Russia” campaign, 340n20
                     General Fascist Confederation of Industry,          Harberger, Arnold, 301
                        387n98                                           hard work, 7, 12, 134, 136, 139, 142–43, 154,
                     Genoa code, 266                                        158–59, 225
                     Genoa Conference, 14–15, 118, 127, 131, 133,        Hartshorn, Vernon, 89, 363n43
                        135–39, 144, 148–49, 151–53, 158–59, 172,        Harvey, Oliver, 257, 369n78, 390n21
                        198–99, 295, 353n1, 353nn3–4, 355n19,            Hawtrey, Ralph G., 10, 15, 19–20, 139,
                        356n23, 363n41; Resolution II, 151–52;              149, 163–65, 171–78, 180–82, 184,



                     444




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   444        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                        6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                                                 index

                        189–91, 193–201, 203, 204, 238, 244,            industrial mobilization, 32, 33, 39, 50, 157,
                        245, 267–68, 300, 304, 308, 344n38,                  327n49
                        356n24, 358–59nn17–22, 360nn24–27,              industrial peace, 128–29, 206, 235, 258, 264,
                        361–62nn29–39, 363n41, 366n61, 366n64,               281
                        367nn67–69, 369n76                              industrial reserve army, 35, 41, 58, 129,
                     Hayek, Friedrich, 403n8                                 399n15
                     Health and Munitions workers committee             infectious diseases, 328n53, 333n24
                        (Britain), 40                                   inflation, 3, 6, 9, 16, 25, 28, 58, 59, 128, 129,
                     Henderson, Arthur, 329n61                               135, 148–51, 154–55, 159, 163, 174–78,
                     Henderson, H. D., 87, 89, 344n36                        180, 181, 187, 189, 190, 194, 195, 198,
                     Hevenstein, Rudolf, 139                                 200, 202, 203, 223, 238–39, 265–66, 271,
                     Hobsbawm, Eric, 76                                      278, 286, 288–89, 300, 304, 329, 354n11,
                     Hobson, S. G., 95                                       355n20, 357n27, 358n7, 361n31, 362n32,
                     Hodge, John, 329n61                                     363nn40–41, 367n68, 369n76, 375n30,
                     Hodges, Frank, 65, 82, 85–86, 88, 90, 95,               384n79, 403n10
                        340n22, 342n29, 343n33                          inflationary government borrowing,
                     Hogg, Douglas, 192                                      358n7
                     homo economicus, 217, 219, 231, 234, 375n26        inheritance tax. See taxation
                     Horne, Robert, 185                                 insurance, 68, 233, 332n17, 335n36, 335n39,
                     housing, 2, 22, 62–64, 77, 96, 98, 185, 284,            335n43; covering agriculture sector ac-
                        333nn24–25, 343n33, 364n52                           cidents, 69, 229; against disabilities and
                     Housing and Town Planning Act (Britain),                old age, 70–71, 229; health, 186, 330n6;
                        63                                                   social, 13, 61, 93; unemployment, 187,
                     Hungary, 6, 75, 125, 337n1                              326n40
                     Hurwitz, Samuel, 29, 33, 42                        interest rates, 8, 9, 91, 128, 150, 153, 173,
                                                                             194, 197, 240, 289, 299, 356n26, 365n52,
                     Ilva/Credito Italiano, 48, 230                          367n68, 369n80, 405n23
                     imports, 14, 23, 27, 29, 34, 128–29, 149, 152,     internal consumption, reduction of, 248,
                         176, 178, 247, 248, 250–51, 265, 322n7,             265
                         324n18, 329nn58–59, 356nn26–27,                international double standard, 261–63
                         369n80, 377n37, 386n96, 389n7, 389n11,         International Labour Organization (ILO),
                         395n46                                              304, 407nn41–42
                     income distribution, 285                           international loans, British, 166–67
                     indirect taxation. See taxation                    international markets, 34, 51, 239, 241, 264,
                     individual-virtue framework, 217–18                     386n92, 401n29
                     Indonesia, 301                                     International Monetary Fund (IMF), 1, 270,
                     industrial austerity, 16, 127, 130, 154–55, 187,        290, 397n68
                         280–81, 290–95; authoritarian industrial       investments, 15, 30, 31, 145, 248, 308, 362n36;
                         policies, 9; and corporativism, 237;                public investments, 31, 145. See also
                         crowding-out argument, 156–57, 189–90,              owner-investor class; savers/investors
                         231, 365n59, 366n61; cutting wages, 157–       invisible hand, 28, 51, 86
                         58; depoliticization, 187–90; disciplining     Istituto Nazionale delle Assicurazioni, 210,
                         labor, 157–58; and fiscal austerity, 129,           233
                         297; and gold standard, 387n98; and            Italian Confederation of Industry, 389n9
                         monetary austerity, 128–29; privatiza-
                         tion, 156–57, 187–90, 231–33; strikes,         Jacchia, Arturo, 348n23
                         191–93, 236–37; and unemployment, 191;         Jevons, William Stanley, 208
                         and wages, 190–93, 233–38                      Johnson, P. B., 330n1
                     industrial autonomy, 36                            Jolly George episode, 80–81
                     Industrial Democracy for the Miners,               Jones, Tom, 103
                         343n32                                         Joslyn, Carl S., 96, 97, 345n45
                     industrial freedom, 341n22                         Joynson-Hicks, Sir William, 201, 366n62



                                                                                                                    445




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   445        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                          6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     index

                     J. P. Morgan Chase Bank, 264, 266–67,               Law, Andrew Bonar, 250
                          395n51                                         Lawson, Nigel, 291
                     Justinian code, 133, 134                            League of Nations, 134, 135, 138, 143, 166,
                                                                              354n8, 354n14, 386n94
                     Kalecki, Michał, 286, 401n28                        leaving certificates, 41–42
                     Keynes, John Maynard, 6, 13, 136, 155, 172,         Leggi Fascistissime, 206, 373n18
                         174, 189, 194–95, 200, 307–8, 360n25,           Lenin, Vladimir, 107, 124–25, 351n45
                         361n31, 367n68, 368n71                          liberal democracies, 7–8, 393n36, 394n41
                     Keynesianism/Keynesian framework, 145,              liberalism, 13–17, 57, 211, 212, 247, 327n48,
                         303, 307–9, 320n17, 355n17, 355n20                   372n13
                     Klein, Naomi, 406n36                                Lippmann, Walter, 393n36
                                                                         lira, 239–42, 250, 254, 262–65, 270, 276, 277,
                     labor: and capital, 234, 282; coercion (see co-          283, 383n78, 384n84, 385n85, 386n92,
                         ercion strategy); control of, 155; dilution          386n94, 387nn98–99, 395n51, 396n53
                         of, 36, 39, 326n37; forced, 37, 323n15; legal   lira-sterling exchange, 254
                         protection of, 381n67; organized, 1, 9, 21,     L’Istituto Nazionale per il Credito e la Coo-
                         40, 43, 59, 77, 103, 178, 190, 235, 278, 281,        perazione, 94
                         290, 309, 399n11; price setting, 42–44.         Literae Humaniores, 358n10
                         See also labor force/laborers/workers           Liverpool police strike, 78
                     labor force/laborers/workers, 11–12, 25, 53,        Lloyd, E. M. H., 28
                         178, 331n16; agency of, 110–11; bargaining      Lloyd George, David, 29, 46, 56–57, 103,
                         power of, 52; control of, 36–37, 99, 103;            188, 250, 323n11, 326n40, 329n61, 331n9,
                         control of production process, 101–2;                331n13, 355n21
                         control over the workplace, 88; demand,         loan-financed public works, 30, 188–89,
                         and Fascism, 265; economic freedom,                  336n44
                         15–16; in Europe, 6; male labor force,          L’Ordine nuovo, 5, 20, 66, 102, 106–16, 123,
                         35–36, 324n21; organizations, 115; politi-           125, 296, 347n13, 348n29, 349n34, 351n45
                         cal agency, 234; politicized, 99; protests      Lüders, Rolf, 301
                         in Italy, 38–39; repression of, 37–38, 162,     Lusignoli, 121
                         223; rights of, 290; self-organization,         Luzzatti, Luigi, 251
                         39; skilled workers, 35; supply, 39–42;
                         unruly, 174, 180, 193, 217–21; vision of,       Maastricht Treaty (1992), 292, 300
                         47–51; women labor force, 39–40. See            Maclean, John, 84
                         also strikes; working classes                   macroeconomics, 16, 18, 20, 175, 300, 308,
                     labor market, 17, 22, 24, 36, 41, 51, 158, 188,        375n28, 402n2
                         233, 235, 265, 266, 280, 286, 324n21,           Malthus, Thomas Robert, 7, 108, 142
                         336n49, 373n16, 400n16; state regulation        mandatory arbitration, in Italy, 43–44. See
                         of, 402n4                                          also arbitration, and labor disputes
                     labor movements, 5, 50, 75–76, 83, 91,              mandatory unemployment insurance. See
                         329n60, 340n20                                     insurance
                     Labour Charter of 1927, 236–37, 241,                Mann, Geoff, 308–9, 320n17
                         383nn75–76                                      Marchese, Carla, 379n50
                     Labour Party (Britain), 62, 63, 76, 81, 169–71,     market coercion. See coercion strategy
                         183, 192, 199, 337n3, 340n20, 367n66            market competition, 86, 114, 235
                     Labriola, Arturo, 124                               market dependence, 92, 109, 232
                     Laidler, David, 172                                 Marshall, Alfred, 208, 359n18
                     laissez-faire capitalism, 28, 35, 42, 54, 57, 72,   Marx, Karl, 112, 217, 348n28, 361n29
                         156, 321n2; and free price mechanism, 28        Maternity and Child Welfare Act of 1918
                     Lamont, Thomas William, 395n51                         (Britain), 328n53
                     Latin America, 288, 406n31                          Matteotti, Giacomo, 210, 226, 259, 373n18,
                     L’Avanti, 20, 61, 77, 79–81, 116–20, 123,              393n36
                         346n11, 351n44, 352n61                          Matteotti Affair, 259, 373n18



                     446




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   446        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                        6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                                            index

                     maximalist program, 338n6                        cies, 148–51, 193–98; and fiscal austerity,
                     McKay, Betsy, 406n33                             128; and industrial austerity, 128–29;
                     McKenna, Reginald, 168–69                        inflation, 148–51; political immunity and
                     McKibbin, Ross, 337–38nn2–3                      production relations, 151–54; savings,
                     Medicina, peasants of, 82–83                     193–98; and unemployment, 344n38
                     Mellon, Andrew, 259, 395n50                    monetary deflation. See deflation
                     metalworkers, 100, 104–5, 117, 122, 125,       monetary management, 152, 163, 165, 172,
                         339n15, 340n16                               193–94, 199, 204, 356n22
                     Michelini, Luca, 222, 312, 346n10,             monetary revaluation, 9, 128, 150, 153, 240–
                         370n4, 371n8, 372n7, 372n13, 374n22,         42, 265, 355n21, 385n92, 387n99
                         376nn32–33, 382n75, 383n78, 387n100        money and commodities, relationship
                     middle classes, 76, 166, 272, 304, 337n38,       between, 32–33
                         338n3, 363n40                              Montagna, Mario, 104–5
                     Migone, Gian Giacomo, 248–49, 263, 311,        Montgomery, David, 311
                         357n35, 393n36                             Monti, Mario, 211, 294, 404nn18–19, 405n22
                     Milan, 71, 79–80, 94, 116–19, 121, 122, 227,   Mont Pelerin Society, 291, 403nn8–9
                         317, 325n32, 338n6, 352n61                 Moreau, Emile, 166
                     Milanović, Branko, 12, 406n35                  Mortara, Giorgio, 82, 380n61
                     Miliband, Ralph, 193, 319n6, 337n3             Munitions (Food) Committee, 326n33
                     militarization of labor force, in Italy, 37    Munitions Act (Britain), 36, 41, 43
                     Millis, H. A., 192–93, 367n66                  munitions factories, in Italy, 31
                     miners, 71, 78, 99, 101; and free-market       munitions production, control of, 33
                         capitalism, 85–86; mining community in     Murphy, J. T., 101, 345n3, 349n33, 350n37
                         Britain, 83; nationalization and worker    Mussolini, Benito, 10, 14, 69, 71, 120, 126,
                         control, 87–89; rank-and-file move-          132, 205, 207, 225, 235–36, 239–42, 254–
                         ments, 88; rise and defeat of, 89–92;        56, 258–59, 262–65, 269, 280–81, 294,
                         taking charge, 83–85                         302, 311, 370n3, 373n18, 394nn42–44
                     Miners Federation of Great Britain
                         (MFGB), 83–85, 88                          National Advisory Council (Britain),
                     Miners’ Next Steps, 342n32                         350n40
                     minimal system of social guarantees, in        National Fascist Party (PNF), Italy, 224. See
                         Britain, 56                                    also Fascism (party)
                     Ministry of Finance (Britain), 378n46          national health service, 67–68, 328n53,
                     Ministry of Health (Britain), 67–68                402n4
                     Ministry of Labour (Britain), 43, 326n40,      National Insurance Act of 1911 (Britain),
                         336n45                                         330n6
                     Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance        nationalization, 34, 44–46, 67, 76, 84, 87–
                         (Italy), 229                                   89, 90, 95, 145, 153, 156, 192, 199, 279,
                     Ministry of Labour and Social Welfare              343n33
                         (Italy), 70, 72                            National Mining Council, 89, 343n35
                     Ministry of Military Assistance and War        National Workers Committee Movement,
                         Pensions (Italy), 59                           50
                     Ministry of Munitions (Britain), 45, 328n53    naturalization, 108, 243
                     Ministry of National Economy (Britain),        natural order of things, 22, 23, 30
                         336n53                                     natural policies, 109, 174
                     Ministry of Reconstruction (Britain), 62–67,   Nenni, Pietro, 75, 338n7
                         332n22, 334nn30–31                         neoclassical models, 11, 131, 206, 208, 211,
                     Ministry of Transport (Britain), 67                215, 217, 237, 301, 309, 354n15, 372nn10–11
                     Missiroli, Mario, 122                          neoliberalism, 291, 307, 310
                     Mond, Sir Alfred, 185                          New Keynesian economists, 309–10
                     monetary austerity, 9, 16, 91, 98, 127, 130,   new order, 5, 38, 100–126
                         238–43, 283, 290–95; dear money poli-      New Statesman, 151



                                                                                                               447




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   447        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                    6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     index

                     Niemeyer, Sir Otto, 10, 20, 153, 162, 165–67,     Pedersen, Susan, 64, 316, 328n52, 329n60,
                         171, 173–74, 177–80, 182–83, 188–91,              332n16
                         195–99, 201–2, 221, 251, 267, 299, 358n10,    Pennacchi, Antonio, 385n86
                         359n18, 360n26, 363n41, 364n48, 365n58,       Period of Full Powers, 207–13
                         366n64, 387n1                                 Perotti, Roberto, 297, 405nn23–24
                     Nitti, Francesco Saverio, 61, 70, 136, 223,       piecework, 41
                         248, 332n17, 332nn20–21, 370n3, 389n10        Pietravalle, Michele, 55–57, 68
                     nominatività dei titoli, 228, 378n48              Pigou, Arthur Cecile, 16, 138, 194, 343n33,
                     non-wage to wage incomes ratio. See                   368n73, 398n8
                         exploitation                                  Pinochet, Augusto, 301, 406n30
                     Norman, Montagu, 165, 173–74, 194,                police strikes, 78, 339n11
                         198–99, 256–57, 261, 266–68, 360n27,          political coercion, 36, 281, 286, 301. See also
                         393–94nn40–41, 397nn62–63                         coercion strategy
                     NUR (National Union of Railwaymen),               political democracy, 100, 298, 341n22
                         341n24                                        political economy, 7, 17–18, 113, 209–10,
                                                                           216, 247, 307, 314, 354n15, 371n7, 374n22,
                     Oberti, Antonio, 119                                  374n27
                     obstructionism, 37, 351n46                        political freedom, 15, 114, 210, 259, 270, 299
                     old-age pensions, 330n6, 333n27, 363n40           political immunity, 151–54
                     Olivetti, Gino, 116–17, 351n43                    political repression, 223, 258–63, 269, 299
                     Ömer, Özlem, 18, 19                               politicization, 78; of economic domain, 6,
                     Ordinovista movement, 12, 102, 107–12, 119,           50, 107, 149; of strikes, 80–83
                         122–23, 125–26, 131–32, 134, 234, 349n35      politics, and economic system, 23, 113–16
                     organized migrations, 326n36                      popolo d’Italia, Il, 71, 212, 374n21
                     Orlando, Vittorio, 57                             Popular Party, Italy, 76, 338n4
                     Orphanides, Athanasios, 406n28                    postwar reconstruction, 136. See also
                     overconsumption, 175, 243, 387n100                    reconstruction(ism/ists)
                     owner-investor class, 237                         poverty, 301, 309; absolute, 18, 284–85,
                     owner profit and worker loss, relationship            321n23; relative, 18
                         between, 18                                   powerlessness, 103, 108, 111
                                                                       Preziosi, Gabriele, 388n5
                     Pact of Palazzo Vidoni, 235, 381n68               Preziosi, Giovanni, 376n33
                     Pantaleoni, Maffeo, 10, 15, 94, 138, 142,         Pribićević, Branko, 104
                        143, 156–58, 206, 207, 208–10, 212–            private capital(ism), 37, 48, 73, 87, 92–93, 101,
                        16, 218–23, 225, 228–29, 232–35, 238,              116, 131, 163, 184, 227–28, 289, 341n26
                        244, 247, 298–99, 312, 320n13, 357n33,         private land seizure, in Britain, 33
                        371nn7–8, 372n13, 374n22, 375n27,              private ownership/property, 22, 25, 35, 45,
                        375n29, 376nn32–33, 378n49, 379n58,                73, 130, 147, 155, 158, 203, 237; elimination
                        380–81nn64–67, 382n75, 384n81                      of, 100; of means of production, 51, 74;
                     Papi, Giuseppe Ugo, 387n100                           state control over, 31–35
                     Pareto, Vilfredo, 209, 212, 213, 215, 247, 312,   private sector, 2, 68, 231, 297, 380n65, 383n75,
                        372nn12–13                                         383n78, 405n23, 407n37
                     Pavan, Ilaria, 330n5, 332n17, 379nn51–52,         privatization, 2, 155–57, 162, 187–90, 231–33,
                        400n23, 402n4                                      289, 291, 311
                     Pavoni, Leo, 55                                   “produce more” axiom, 127, 161, 169, 202,
                     peasants, 40, 79, 105, 341n23, 350n41; inva-          213, 233, 244, 248, 270
                        sion in Medicina, 82–83; right to occupy       production: costs, 128–29; process, 154–55;
                        land, in Italy, 34                                 relations, 151–54; social relationships of,
                     Pease, John William Beaumont, 258–60,                 32–33; state control over, 31–35
                        391n26                                         productive class, 12
                     Peden, George C., 359n18, 363n40, 369n77          productivist reformism, 70




                     448




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   448        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                         6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                                                index

                     productivity, 325n33; and disciplined             reforms, 152; social, 54, 56–60, 65, 68, 70, 72,
                         workers, 37; in war industries, Italy,            74, 140, 147, 205, 235, 338n4; supply-side
                         325n31                                            reforms, 297; and working-class con-
                     profit rates, 273, 277, 398n6                         sciousness, relation between, 73
                     profit shares, 275, 286                           Regional Industrial Committees, 33, 36, 39,
                     profits-to-wages ratio, 275–76                        40, 42
                     progressive tax reform, 377n38                    regressive taxation, 2–3, 8–9, 128, 146, 148,
                     PSI, 122, 351n45                                      162, 180–82, 226, 291
                     public deficits, 294, 300, 304, 355n20            Renzi, Matteo, 294–95, 405n22
                     public education, 2, 334n29                       reserve army of labor, 35, 41, 58, 129, 399n15
                     public employees, 2, 9, 31, 79, 187, 188, 231,    revaluation. See monetary revaluation
                         241, 272, 294, 298, 367n66, 378n45            Ricardo, David, 7, 108, 142
                     public employment agencies (Italy), 41, 129,      Ricci, Umberto, 12, 206, 208–18, 220,
                         232, 405n25                                       222–23, 229–31, 236, 239, 247, 255, 299,
                     public expenditure, reduction in, 8, 23, 72,          371nn7–8, 373n16, 374n22, 380n59
                         144, 145, 152, 171, 183–84, 185, 209–10,      Rignano, Eugenio, 377n40
                         228–30, 379n54, 404n17                        Rigola, Rinaldo, 60, 62, 68
                     public housing program, 185                       Rocco, Alfredo, 382n75
                     public investments, 31, 145                       Rodd, Rodney, 388n1
                     public utility societies, 333n25                  Rodd, Sir J. Rennell, 250
                     public welfare, 56, 290                           Rosboch, Ettore, 378n46, 383n75
                     public works, 94, 129, 188–89, 214, 232,          Russia, 6, 50, 80–81, 101, 115, 125, 220, 301–2,
                         336n44, 338n7, 366n61, 373n16, 380n60             340n20, 353n3, 406n35
                     purchasing power, 149–50, 175–76, 178, 181,       Russian Revolution, 50, 101, 220
                         250, 282, 304, 361n31                         Rydbeck, Oscar, 146–47
                     pure economics, 10–11, 12, 206–8, 213–17,         Ryland Adkins Committee, 333n27
                         220–21, 225, 234–35, 243–44, 245, 247,
                         255, 299, 312, 372nn11–12, 374n22, 376n33,    Sacchi decree, 31
                         382n72, 382n75                                Sachs, Jeffrey, 303
                                                                       sacrifices, imposition of, 162, 203–4, 221,
                     Ragionieri, Ernesto, 329n58                           263, 265, 299, 375n30
                     railway budget, 380n63                            Salandra, Antonio, 57
                     railways, 6, 24, 32, 46, 67, 78, 88, 119, 210,    Salter, Alfred, 16–17
                         225, 232–33, 341n24                           Salter, J. A., 321n3
                     rank-and-file movements, 6, 36, 38, 39, 42,       Salvemini, Gaetano, 122–23, 370n3, 384n79
                         50, 54, 70, 83, 88, 99, 100, 103, 105–6,      Samuel, Herbert, 363n45
                         116–18, 345n4, 350n40                         Sankey, Sir John, 72, 84–85, 343n35
                     rank-and-file workers, 117, 122, 123, 125         Sankey Committee, 46, 85–89, 101, 156
                     rational saver, 11                                Santhià, Battista, 118
                     rationing, 34, 324n18, 329nn58–59                 savers/investors, 6, 129, 182, 189, 217, 231,
                     real wages, 18, 49, 178, 190, 237–38, 276, 282–       239, 296, 311, 365n59
                         83, 290, 329nn58–59, 384n79, 400n17           savings, 9, 145, 150, 177, 193–98, 220, 225, 311,
                     reconstruction(ism/ists), 53–58, 67–71, 73,           362n36, 375n31
                         101, 134, 167, 177                            Say’s law, 219, 308, 355n17, 362n36, 375n28
                     red cooperatives, 94                              scala mobile, 293
                     redistribution, 56, 73, 153, 162–63, 194, 252,    Schacht, Hjalmar, 267, 397n62, 397n64
                         301, 375n29, 379n50                           Schanzer, Carlo, 251–52, 377n38, 388n3
                     “red league” of agrarian workers, 77              scientific knowledge, 200
                     “red union” of metal workers, 77                  Seassaro, Cesare, 123, 352n63
                     red years, 15, 18, 59, 75, 80, 83, 275            Segreto, Luciano, 48, 328n54
                     reformism, 54, 70–72, 108, 379n53                 self-equilibrating approach, 238




                                                                                                                    449




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   449        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                         6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     index

                     self-governance, 82, 99–100, 115                  state interventionism, 6, 24–26, 30–31, 34,
                     self-rationalizations, 25                             44, 51, 54, 56, 69, 70, 74, 164, 191, 237, 273,
                     self-regulation, 24, 36, 193                          290, 321n2, 384n78
                     self-restraint, 221                               state of exception, 322n8
                     Semmler, Willi, 315, 402n1                        state ownership, 101
                     Serpieri, Arrigo, 59                              state socialism, 47, 156, 383n75
                     Sexton, James, 81                                 Stiglitz, Joseph, 309–10
                     Shaikh, Anwar, 315, 319n8, 375n28                 Straker, William, 88, 341n28, 342n30
                     Shapiro, Carl, 309, 310                           Strakosch, Henry, 139, 150, 361n28
                     share prices, 398n5                               strikes, 4, 16, 25, 26, 37–38, 50, 60, 78–79,
                     shell factories, 31                                   103–4, 117, 191–93, 236–37, 252, 278–81,
                     shipping, 6, 24, 28–29, 84, 333n22                    290–92, 339–40nn12–16, 381n68,
                     shipyards, 29, 31, 118                                399nn11–12; committees, 104–5; politi-
                     shop committee movement, 103, 115                     cal, 80–83; white strike, 117–18
                     shop stewards, 5, 20, 50, 101–3, 105,             strikomania, 78–80, 99
                         345nn3–4, 346n7, 346n9, 349n33                Stringher, Bonaldo, 265, 267, 268, 395n47,
                     Siepmann, H. A, 137–38, 354n6, 354n14                 396n52, 397n63
                     Slobodian, Quinn, 310                             Strong, Benjamin, 262, 265, 267–68, 394n41,
                     Smillie, Robert, 85–86, 88                            395n51, 397n62, 397n64
                     Smith, Adam, 7, 28, 87, 142                       Sturzo, Luigi, 338n4
                     Smith, Don A. L., 65                              Suharto’s dictatorship, 301
                     Smith, Herbert, 85                                Summers, Lawrence, 288, 302, 304, 354n15
                     Smith, Sir Llewellyn, 360n26                      syndicalism, 349n35, 396n56
                     social expenditures, 150, 184–87, 230–31, 289,
                         402n4                                         Tabellini, Guido, 295, 405n22, 405n24
                     social injustice, 342n29                          Tasca, Angelo, 49, 57, 71, 72, 82, 83, 107, 120,
                     Socialist, The, 101, 103, 104                         124, 125, 332n18, 348n31, 370n2
                     Socialist Almanac, 119                            Tawney, Richard H., 29, 31, 32, 45, 65, 85
                     Socialist Party, Italy, 68, 70, 76–77, 81, 120,   taxation, 146, 195, 226–28, 291, 375n30,
                         123, 226, 335n36, 338nn5–6, 350n41,               377n40, 378nn44–45, 378n47, 401n26;
                         351n45                                            corporation tax, 183; and fiscal austerity,
                     social justice, 56, 58, 69, 227, 338n4                180–84, 226–28; indirect, 181; in-
                     social polarization, 71                               heritance tax, 226, 228, 377n40, 378n49;
                     social policy, 228–31, 312                            produttivista principle, 227; progressive
                     social redistribution, 73, 153, 162, 194, 301,        tax reform, 377n38; regressive, 2–3,
                         375n29                                            8–9, 128, 146, 148, 162, 180–82, 226, 291;
                     social reforms, 54, 56–60, 65, 68, 70, 72, 74,        universal, 146, 214
                         140, 147, 205, 235, 338n4                     Taylor, Lance, 18, 19, 330n2
                     social revolution, 81–82                          technical documentation, 138
                     social spending, cuts in, 145, 296–97, 312        technocracy, 9, 10–12, 130–31, 160, 221–22,
                     social welfare, 55–56, 72; for social peace,          268, 299, 353n5
                         58–63. See also welfare                       technocratic power, 151, 292, 309
                     Society for Mutual Aid and Cooperatives,          technocratic project, 7, 158, 199–202, 213–17
                         60–61                                         technocrats, 10, 13, 15, 16, 131, 137–39, 142–43,
                     socioeconomic system, 8, 12, 14, 17, 72–74,           147, 157, 165–67, 187, 190, 195–96, 237, 247,
                         108, 131, 158, 305                                266–67, 269
                     sociopolitical order, 4, 216                      Terracini, Umberto, 107, 348n31
                     Spriano, Paolo, 101–2, 117–21, 325n28,            textile industry, 32, 60, 79, 118, 250, 329n56,
                         346n11, 351nn45–46, 351n48, 352n63                340n16
                     Stagiotti, Mario, 352n63                          Thatcher, Margaret, 184, 291, 303n8
                     Stangalini, Piera, 120                            Times, The, 60, 65, 67, 84–86, 88, 168–69,




                     450




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   450        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                           6/10/22 1:21 PM
                                                                                                                 index

                         239, 254–56, 259–60, 276–77, 390n14,            virtuous saver, 15, 217–21
                         391n24, 394n45                                  Vissering, Gerard, 139, 141, 150–51, 155, 157,
                     Tittoni, Tommaso, 332n18                                397n62
                     Togliatti, Palmiro, 5, 103, 106–11, 114–15, 234,    Vittorio Emanuele III (king), 49, 205
                         346n5, 348n31, 349n35                           Volcker, Paul, 159
                     Toniolo, Gianni, 228, 230, 241, 311, 370n3,         Volpi, Giuseppe, 238, 239, 241–42, 264–65,
                         376n34, 378nn45–47, 379n56, 380n63,                 267–68, 384n82, 385n85, 386nn94–95,
                         387n99, 398nn5–8, 399n14, 400n16                    395n50, 396n54, 396n60
                     Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act (Brit-          voluntary enlistment, in Britain, 35, 324n20
                         ain), 192–93, 367n66
                     trade imbalance crisis, in Italy, 250               wage(s), 162, 190, 196, 233–38, 290; cuts, 150,
                     Trade Union Act (Britain), 367n66                       157–58, 241, 282, 331n14; increases, 79–
                     Trade Union Congress, 367n66                            80, 253; local bargains, 42; nominal, 241;
                     trade unions, 36–38, 43, 48, 59, 66, 69,                repression, 2, 9, 17–19, 286–87, 320n22
                         90, 102, 105, 111, 178, 237, 253, 292,          wage earners, 121, 177, 194, 227, 330n6
                         330nn61–62, 339n8; abolition of, 236;           wage relations, 21–22, 25, 45, 51, 74, 100, 130,
                         and bargaining, 42; in Britain, 77; in              147, 155, 158, 203
                         Italy, 77; membership, 39, 77–78                wage relations, state control over, 35–37;
                     Treasury Agreement, 322n10                              coping with a small labor supply, 39–42;
                     Tribuna, La, 60                                         disciplining labor, 37–39; labor price
                     Trichet, Jean-Claude, 293–94                            setting, 42–44
                     Tudor-Walters Committee, 64                         wage shares, 18, 272–77, 286, 290–91, 293,
                     Tuesday Club, 173–74, 360n28                            297, 397n1, 404n13, 404n17, 406n35
                     Turati, Filippo, 122, 377n40                        Walras, Léon, 208
                     Turin, 5, 33, 34, 50, 60, 71, 79, 99, 102, 105–6,   Walsh, Tom, 100–101
                         113, 117–19, 211                                war collectivism, 24, 29–30, 33, 50, 78, 101,
                                                                             130, 149, 243
                     unemployment, 2, 6, 8, 16, 35, 62, 69, 82, 91,      war effort, of Britain, 27–29
                        129, 145, 150, 168–70, 187–91, 195–97, 201,      war industrial committees, 348n23
                        203, 230, 235, 242, 273, 278, 281, 286, 301,     war industries, 24, 31, 42, 75, 325nn30–31
                        303, 309, 336n44, 387n99, 399nn9–10;             war pensions, 55, 59, 61, 331n16
                        and excessive wages, 191; insurance, 187,        War Savings Movement, 178
                        365n55, 379n52                                   wealthy classes, 179, 182, 377n38
                     Unemployment Insurance Act (Britain),               Webb, Sidney, 85, 343n33
                        336n44                                           welfare: expenditures, cuts to, 17, 128, 145,
                     union of industrialists, 116, 121, 124                  389n8; public, 56, 290; social, 58–63, 72;
                     United States, 1, 14, 15, 18, 179, 206, 240, 248,       social control of, 336n49; and war, 56,
                        249, 252, 259, 263–65, 302–3, 311, 393n36,           331n16
                        395n46; Federal Reserve, 264; USAID,             Whitley Councils, 38, 327n40, 331n14
                        302; worker wages, 18–19                         Wolfe, Humbert, 31, 36, 41, 43, 326n37
                     United States and Fascist Italy (Migone), 248       women labor force, 39–40, 325n29
                     universal health care, 185                          Women’s Cooperative Guild, 64, 333n26
                     universal taxation, 146, 214                        Women’s Employment Committee (Britain),
                     unruly workers, 174, 180, 193, 217–21                   39–40
                     Unwin, Raymond, 64                                  Women’s Housing Sub-Committee (Brit-
                                                                             ain), 64
                     Vassalli, Filippo, 56, 330n4                        worker demonstrations. See strikes
                     Vecchi, Giovanni, 284, 371, 382n75, 400n21          workers. See labor force/laborers/workers
                     Village Institute, 66–67                            Workers’ Educational Association, 66
                     “virtual cost” of economic abstinence,              working classes, 4, 8, 9, 11–12, 15–17, 20, 25,
                         217–18                                              35, 36, 40, 47, 49–50, 59, 61–63, 65, 67,




                                                                                                                    451




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   451        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                          6/10/22 1:21 PM
                     index

                     working classes (continued)                         budgets, 29–30; private consumption
                        69–70, 76, 77, 79, 83, 92, 96, 99, 100,          during, 30; and shift in power relations
                        106, 110, 112, 116, 118, 127, 129, 130, 133,     between capital and labor, 35; and
                        158, 182, 219, 225, 231, 263, 299, 329n58,       welfare, 56, 331n16
                        341n22                                         Worthington-Evans, Sir Laming, 133–34
                     World Bank, 295, 302, 404n22, 407n42
                     World War I, 5–6, 21, 27, 54, 83, 296; and        Yeltsin, Boris, 301–2, 303
                        bureaucrats, 44–47; and economic
                        problems, 25; escalation of production,        Zamagni, Vera, 30, 80, 91, 237, 282, 324n18,
                        27; and factory committees, 102–6;                329n58, 339n14, 384n79, 400n20
                        Italian manufacturing during, 33; and          Zini, Zino, 113–14, 349n53
                        laissez-faire tradition of balanced            Zucaro, Domenico, 347n12




                     452




                        You are reading copyrighted material published by University of Chicago Press.
                     Unauthorized posting, copying, or distributing of this work except as permitted under
C8098-Mattei.indd   452        U.S. copyright law is illegal and injures the author and publisher.                    6/10/22 1:21 PM
